[RFC 0145] Doc-comments (#145)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0145-doc-strings.md

>
> This RFC aims at providing a formal skeleton, where sections can be extended by the nix community

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

The following abstract rules describe how to write doc-strings.

The rules are partially derived from the sections below where alternative solutions are considered. So make sure to read them as well.

> I'am very happy if you comment about whether we should use `## {content}` or `/** {content} */`
> I did write this RFC tailored towards `##` but using `/** */` is still an open discussion.

We must find one solution out of the following:

|  | 0 `##` | 1 `/** */`   |
|---|---|---|
| 0 `# {Keyword}` | `## # Example` | `/** # Example */` |
| 1 `@{Keyword}:`  | `# @Exmaple:` |`/** @Example: */` |

Proposed Solution (0,0) => `##` For docstring body and markdown headings `# H1`

### Format Rules

- [F100] - Docs-string are all comments. That start with `##` or `#!` e.g. `## {content}`

- [F200] - Doc-strings always document / relate to an expression. 
- [F201] - Doc-strings starting with `##` relate to the expression in the next line / or more precisely to the next node in the AST. (Details follow, as this might be non-trivial)

> - [F202] - Doc-strings that are at the top of a file and that start with `#!` describe the expression exported from the whole file. (Previous node in AST)

Author: Do you have any suggestions ?

> - [F202] - Doc-strings that are at the top of a file and that start with `#!` describe the expression exported from the whole file. (Previous node in AST)

Reviewer: maybe something like `#*` or `#%`

> - [F202] - Doc-strings that are at the top of a file and that start with `#!` describe the expression exported from the whole file. (Previous node in AST)

Author: How about `##?`

> - [F202] - Doc-strings that are at the top of a file and that start with `#!` describe the expression exported from the whole file. (Previous node in AST)

Reviewer: or maybe `###`?

Example:

```nix
    /** 
        <Description or Tagline>
     
        @Example:
    
        <Comprehensive code>
     
        @Type:
        
        <Type Signature> 
    */
    mapAttrs = f: s: #...
```

| Pro | Con |
|---|---|
| Clear termination | Takes up more vertical space |
| Doesn't change the existing convention by much | doesn't visually stand out by much (just one more `*` ) |
| Mostly stays compatible with existing implementations | Multiple blocks are not concatenated. They need to be continued |
| No configuration required (LSP for autocompletion on newlines) |  |
|  | Indentation is not clear / more complex. e.g. The indentation of the first contentfull line is defined as 0, this is how "Noogle" currently works) LSPs could highlight this or show \| (vertical lines) |

## Candidates not considered

Javadoc style

```java
  /**
    * A short description
    * @author  Stefan Schneider
    * @version 1.1
    * @see    https://some.url
    */
    public class Product {
     ...
    }
```

Although this has already sneaked into some nix comments. This format is not considered best practice for a variety of good reasons.

> 1. Starting every line with `*` creates visual conflicts with markdown bullet list also starting with `*`

Author: Yes. I know I should have mentioned it. Added this as a 'con' argument for markdown headings.

### Impossible to differentiate from internal comments

The lack of a formal definition of a doc-comment also means there is no reliable way to distinguish them from internal comments, which would result in automatically-produced API documentation which includes the wrong type of comments.

### References to the problems above

This curated link collection highlights the Nix ecosystem's inconsistencies, a primary focus of this RFC.

#### nixpkgs - comment examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)

# Design
[design]: #detailed-design

In the following we give a comprehensive overview to our decision that we've made. Detailed arguments for and against every decision can be found in the [Decisions](#Decisions) section

## CommonMark

> **CommonMark is the content of all doc-comments.**

Reviewer 2: If we're going to use Markdown, there's an important mistake that Rust made that we should learn from — how to handle headings.  It shouldn't be possible to create headings that disrupt the outline of the page, when multiple functions are rendered on the same page.  For example, if you're rendering a `lib.attrsets` page, you might have an `<h1><code>lib.attrsets</code></h1>` at the top of the page.  It shouldn't be possible to create an h1 from the Markdown doc comment, because that would disrupt the outline of the page (by implying that the `lib.attrsets` section had come to an end).

There are a couple of ways to fix this.  One way would be to ban first level headings, and say that all other levels are reserved for content, and renderers shouldn't use them.  A better way would be to have the renderer automatically increase heading levels beyond whatever the maximum level it uses around the rendered content is.  In either case, it would mean content won't have the full six levels of headings available to it, so this RFC should pick one of those options, and specify which heading levels are allowed.

Reviewer 3: My preference is let users start at level 1 and shift them down as needed. We can have a rule that at least 3 levels of headers need to be made available. However I think it is fine to allow 6 levels and renderers decide how to display that. 

Note that there are ways in HTML to reset the heading level so the easiest solution is just wrapping user content such that they hare h1-h6 but aren't top-level headings.

Reviewer 3: I think the most important thing is that we set a consistent guidelines for users. We should tell them to always start with a top-level header. Then the renders can easily handle it. It is much worse in Rust because some people start with h1, some h3 and so on. So the renderers need to try and guess what is meant.

Author: Tbh. I'd prefer not to include these guidelines here. This is either part of another RFC or you can setup a repository with rules. I'd prefer to keep this rfc focused on what doc-comments are and how to integrate them into the language. Not writing styleguidelines on how to style your commonmark... otherwise this will take another year to complete ^^.

Adopting CommonMark as the content for all doc-comments brings the benefits of widely accepted and understood documentation format in tech projects, while maintaining profitability and consistency within the Nix ecosystem by aligning with existing [NixOS/RFC-72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

## `/** */` is the doc-comment format

The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. A single choice provides the best developer experience and simplifies tooling.

## Placement

> **The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the expression they are documenting.**

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if it's the right mental model to think of it as doc comments being attached to expressions. Say you have an attribute set interface where you want to be able to render documentation for individual attributes, but there's a wrapping `if` expression:

```nix
/** (A) */
{ cacheFile }:
if builtins.pathExists cacheFile then
  import cacheFile
else
  {
    /** (B) */
    backend = "bar";
    result = "bar-result";
  }
```

Where would I add a doc-comment to document what `backend` is?
- (A) Putting it here would attach it to the lambda, you'd have to manually write headers or so to indicate attributes, and it couldn't be queried programmatically to belong to a specific attribute.
- (B) Putting it here doesn't feel right. It's not that I'm only documenting the second branch, it's just that there's no literal attribute set in the other branch.

All of this could get really nasty if you have a lot of nestings.

This relates to being able to specify a type for expressions. Notably the module system doesn't suffer from this because there you have a separate DSL to describe the interface and its types.

Author: Right i agree totally. In this case i think it would be best to write a doc-comment in place *A*. 
If the function really returns different `attribute sets` depending on the  `ìf` statement there. This means the function has a *non-constant return type*. Which I try to avoid as much as possible because i think it's and anti-pattern. 
But i get the point.

I wouldn't want to use the module system just for documentation. Having documentation as values is an approach which we also considered but i think it is valuable to provide both methods.

Reviewer 4: Ah no the idea here is that both branches return the same type (I tried to illustrate this with one branch just being the cached version). In the first branch it's just read from a different file.

Author: @infinisil Are your concerns addressed?

Only whitespaces between the `documentable node` and the `doc-comment`

```nix
/**Doc for anonymous lambda function*/
↓
x: x;
```

```nix
listToAttrs [
  { name = "foo"; value = /**Documentation for '1'*/1; }
]
```

#### Attributes 

It is allowed to write the documentation before the attribute instead of placing it right before the body.

```nix
/**Doc for lambda function bound to a variable*/
           ↓
assigned = x: x;
```

```nix
{
    /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */
          ↓
    foo = map (x: x);          
}
```

#### Ambiguous placement

```nix
/**Doc B*/
int = /**Doc A*/1;

# Documentation is 'Doc A' because it is directly next to the documentable body.
```

#### Dynamic attribute

```nix
{
    /** Documentation for '2' */
                                   ↓
    ${let name = "bar"; in name} = 2;
}
# Dynamic attribute
```

#### Partial lambda functions

```nix
/**Generic doc for all partial lambda functions*/
↓1 ↓2          ↓3
x: ({y, ...}:  z: x + y) * z;

# All partial functions can share the same placement with the outermost lambda.
# 1 -> Lambda Value `x: ({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z` 
# 2 -> Lambda Value `({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z`    

> # 3 -> Lambda Value `z: x + y) * z`               

Reviewer 4: This seems odd to me, why is this necessary? Wouldn't it make more sense to just attach the doc comment to only the first lambda? Or alternatively, why does this only work for lambda's but not other expressions?

PS: There's a misplaced `)` here, should be at the end.

Author: Yes overall you would usually write some documentation for the specialized lambda. We thought of adding it as a fallback for spezialized lamdas when documentation is missing or cannot be written elsewhere. 
You still see that the documented function is already applied e.g., 2 times but there is not other source of documentation. In this case you can decide to display this "fallback documentation" of the first lambda. Its still an edge case and shouldnt be overused because it is less correct.

- (-) Indentation is more complex and visually less present.
    - (+) It would be most intuitive if its indentation logic implements Nix's magic multiline strings.
- (-) Takes up more vertical space
- (+) Takes up less horizontal space. (In contrast to, e.g., `##` lines do not have to be prefixed)
- (+) Only one character to change the semantics of the whole comment. 
    - (+) Allows to add and remove things from the documentation quickly.
    - (-) Accidentally adding/removing could happen.
    
</details>

## CommonMark as the content of doc-comments

**Observing**: Doc-comments' content should be intuitive to read and write and straightforward to render. The nixdoc convention is only widely adopted in certain places (e.g., /lib) in nixpkgs. It may also come from a need for more understanding of the current self-cooked format.

**Considering**: CommonMark as the content format.

**Decision**: CommonMark is the content of all doc-comments.

> Markdown is the most accepted and understood format for writing documentation in tech projects. Also, following the existing RFC-72 is highly profitable and consistent for the Nix ecosystem.

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

> - (+) CommonMark is the official format in nix; Decided in [RFC72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- (+) CommonMark is the official format for Nix documentation; Decided in [RFC72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).
```

---
feature: doc-comment-standard
start-date: 2023-03-27
author: hsjobeki
co-authors: --
shepherd-team: @DavHau; @sternenseemann; @asymmetric
shepherd-leader: @lassulus
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Propose a standard format specification for doc-comments.

This RFC includes two concerns that define a doc-comment:

- Outer format rules to allow distinction between regular comments and doc-comments
- Inner format rules that describe the required format of a doc-comment.

> However, both concerns relate closely to each other; It makes sense and reduces bureaucracy to address both in a single RFC.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

# Definitions

For this RFC, we adopt the following definitions:

> - **doc-comment**: A structured comment documenting the code's API.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **doc-comment**: A structured comment documenting the code's interface.
```

"Application programming" seems irrelevant at best.

> - **doc-comment**: A structured comment documenting the code's API.

Reviewer 7: Both Go and Rust use "doc comment", without the hyphen.

```suggestion
- **doc-comment**: A structured comment documenting the code's API.
```

> - **internal comment**: A free-form comment for those interested in the code's implementation.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- **regular comment**: A free-form comment for those interested in the code's implementation.
```

Reviewer 7: Not a blocker, but I do think it's important to get the naming right before merging, and "regular comment" avoids introducing a new term for a concept which already exists.

Reviewer 6: I'd rather have a term with intrinsic meaning rather than something derived from the evolution of the language.

```suggestion
- **implementation comment**: A free-form comment for to help with understanding the implementation and perhaps design concerns such as requirements that aren't obvious.
```

Reviewer 7: @roberth I mean, do we need to get into what an internal/regular/implementation document does/is for? That seems out of scope :) 

The basic idea is that it's a comment that's not meant to be displayed as part of public documentation.

Author: I'd update the wording to use the following. This is also consistent with the current grammar/lexer: `comment` `doc-comment`.

The doc-comment properties are grouped into these subcategories:

> - **Outer format**: Specifies rules linking code (API) and doc-comments. (e.g. placement, syntax rules)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **Outer format**: Specifies rules linking code and doc-comments, regarding placement within expressions and the chosen lexical syntax of the comment within the existing Nix language.
```

- I think we can be exhaustive about a document we write (no e.g.)
- Be a bit more specific

Author: Great improvement. I'll apply the suggestion thx @roberth

> - **Inner format**: Specifies rules affecting the comment's actual content. (e.g. usage of commonMark)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- **Inner format**: Specifies rules affecting the comment's actual content. (e.g. its syntax)
```

Author: I think @roberth  suggested that we don't use 'e.g.,' here. And just be as specific as possible.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The following are the envisioned goals.

- Create distinct outer and inner formats for Nix doc-comments to enable accurate automated parsing and extraction. 
- Ensure clear differentiation from internal comments, making them accessible to tooling solutions such as documentation rendering and building. 

> - Migrate `nixpkgs'` comments to this format.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Migrate `nixpkgs` comments (when they were meant as doc-comments) to this format.
```

Author: I did open this (draft) PR. https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/262987 which showcases the total migration effort.
Its hard to detect (with tooling) if something is meant to be a doc-comment. But i think we can just do some manual work. Starting with the lib functions.

    y: x;
```

## Current problems

### Multiplicity of formats

Within nixpkgs alone, several conventions for doc-comments have emerged, see [1], [2] and [3].

Notably, most doc-comments utilize some fraction of the of CommonMark syntax, even if they are not meant to be rendered.

[1]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders/default.nix
[2]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix
[3]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix

In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not formally specified**.

Among the formats encountered in the wild, the one used in `nixpkgs/lib` is the only one intended to be rendered as part of an API documentation, via the nixdoc third-party tool, whose syntax has not been standardized.

### Impossible to differentiate from internal comments

The lack of a formal definition of a doc-comment also means there is no reliable way to distinguish them from internal comments, which would result in automatically-produced API documentation which includes the wrong type of comments.

### References to the problems above

> > This curated link collection highlights the Nix ecosystem's inconsistencies, a primary focus of this RFC.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This curated link collection highlights the Nix ecosystem's inconsistencies, a primary focus of this RFC.
```

#### nixpkgs - comment examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)

# Design
[design]: #detailed-design

> In the following we give a comprehensive overview to our decision that we've made. Detailed arguments for and against every decision can be found in the [Decisions](#Decisions) section

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
What follows is a an overview of the proposed changes. Detailed arguments for and against every decision can be found in the [Decisions](#Decisions) section
```

## CommonMark

> **CommonMark is the content of all doc-comments.**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**CommonMark is the format of the content of all doc-comments.**
```

Reviewer 6: Does this mean keywords like `@param` are excluded from the spec?

Author: Yep. For now we leave it just tooling specific implementation. We can make another rfc in the future this one is quite complicated already.

Reviewer 7: Or just 
```suggestion
**Doc comments are formatted in [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/).**
```

> Adopting CommonMark as the content for all doc-comments brings the benefits of widely accepted and understood documentation format in tech projects, while maintaining profitability and consistency within the Nix ecosystem by aligning with existing [NixOS/RFC-72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

Reviewer 7: profitability?

## `/** */` is the doc-comment format

> The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. This choice not only provides the best developer experience but also minimizes the need for additional tooling overhead.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. A single choice provides the best developer experience and simplifies tooling.
```

## Placement

> **The placment describes the relationship between doc-comments and the expression they are documenting.**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the expression they are documenting.**
```

> - Doc-comments are placed before the documentable node. Only `WHITESPACES` are allowed in between. ([Examples](#basic-examples)) 
>     - `WHITESPACES` are: `[\n \r ' ' \t]`.

Reviewer 6: Where does this all-caps syntax come from?

It doesn't seem like this RFC should define which characters are considered whitespace.

```suggestion
- Doc-comments are placed before the documentable node. Only whitespace is allowed in between. ([Examples](#basic-examples)) 
```

Would be nice to refer to the lexer or something, but this suggestion is already good enough IMO.

Author: Agreed. But i could the lexer could consider comments itself as whitespace too? We didn't want to allow this.

Reviewer 6: The lexer does define it on a separate line, at

https://github.com/NixOS/nix/blob/46028ff76493439921a5a9200d14c015f0a0c025/src/libexpr/lexer.l#L304

So while the parser (ie stage after lexing) can't see comments (or whitespace for that matter) the distinction exists. Whitespace is never understood to include comments, exception perhaps in some language implementations where the authors decide to abbreviate names and not care much about definitions.

No need to worry about this. Whitespace is still just whitespace.

- The documentation present before the `attribute path` describes the body of the attribute. ([Examples](#Attributes))
    - In case placement is ambiguous, the one closer to the body has higher precedence. ([Examples](#ambiguous-placement))
         
- All partial functions of a curried lambda can share the same placement with the outermost lambda. ([Examples](#partial-lambda-functions))
  

> > Note: Research of the RFC Sheperds Team showed that this allows for intuitive placements like are already done in nixpkgs.

Reviewer 7: I don't know if this section is the place to justify decisions.

Author: Got the same feeling. I try to find a better place or delete it

### Examples

#### Basic examples

Only whitespaces between the `documentable node` and the `doc-comment`

```nix
/**Doc for anonymous lambda function*/
↓
x: x;
```

```nix
listToAttrs [
  { name = "foo"; value = /**Documentation for '1'*/1; }
]
```

#### Attributes 

It is allowed to write the documentation before the attribute instead of placing it right before the body.

```nix
/**Doc for lambda function bound to a variable*/
           ↓
assigned = x: x;
```

```nix
{
    /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */
          ↓
    foo = map (x: x);          
}
```

#### Ambiguous placement

```nix
/**Doc B*/
int = /**Doc A*/1;

# Documentation is 'Doc A' because it is directly next to the documentable body.

> ```

Reviewer 6: Was expecting an example with an attribute path syntax when you referred me here. Seems worth adding.

```
### Attribute path leaf
/** Doc */
a.b.c = 1;
```

`Doc` applies to `c` only, I suppose?

Author: Yep. As written only applies to the leaf. Maybe we should explicitly explain what it applies to.

Author: Oh Sorry. I think we did indeed forget to add this specific example. :+1:

#### Dynamic attribute

```nix
{
    /** Documentation for '2' */
                                   ↓
    ${let name = "bar"; in name} = 2;
}
# Dynamic attribute
```

#### Partial lambda functions

```nix
/**Generic doc for all partial lambda functions*/
↓1 ↓2          ↓3
x: ({y, ...}:  z: x + y) * z;

# All partial functions can share the same placement with the outermost lambda.
# 1 -> Lambda Value `x: ({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z` 
# 2 -> Lambda Value `({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z`    
# 3 -> Lambda Value `z: x + y) * z`               
```

# Decisions

Each subsection here contains a decision along with arguments and counter-arguments for (+) and against (-) that decision.

> Note: This RFC does not promote any tool; It focuses only on the format, not implementation. At the same time, this RFC must be technically feasible.

## `/**` to start a doc-comment

**Observing**: Doc-comments' outer format should be a distinctive subset of regular comments. Nevertheless, it should allow native writing without an IDE or editor support.

> **Considering**: `/** {content} */` where `{content}` is the inner format.

Reviewer 6: I thought **Considering** was for providing requirements and argumentation.

Author: Uh okay i'll change that

**Decision**: Single-line comments (starting with `##`) **cannot be used** in any form for documentation puposes.

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (+) It Would be consistent with providing variants for both nix comments.
- (-) Doc-comments should have only one variant to reduce complexity.  
- (-) documentation will likely everytime take up more than one line.
- (-) If documentation grows bigger than one line, refactoring into a multiline-doc-comment must occur.
- (+) Offer the choice.
- (o) Single lines could also be concatenated to form multi-line documentation.
  - (+) Convinience
  - (-) Technical more complex
- (+) Takes up less vertical space
- (-) Visually confusing when every line starts with a `#` character.
    - (-) Potential visual conflicts with the content that is markdown (e.g. with headings).
- (+) Indentation of the content is clear.

</details>

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Changes the existing comments inside the code base

This could be automated.

Also, the migration could be performed piecemal, starting perhaps with `nixpkgs.lib`.

See future work.

> ## Tooling to produce the nixpkgs manual

Reviewer 7: What's the drawback?

Author: What do you mean? We should talk with somebody familiar with the current manual and make sure that it adds support for markdown. 
future work? 
A sentence like:
„
All current rendering solutions should support rendering markdown from the doc-comment. „

Reviewer 7: I mean that we're in the drawbacks section, and it's not clear from the title what the drawback is.

| breaks when interrupted with newlines | Yes | No | ? | No | |
| Simplicity (Brainload) | Medium | Simple | Complex | More Complex | |

### Refactoring note

**Observing**: From a refactoring perspective, it might also be interesting to see how many conflicts the different formats would cause.

nixpkgs comments:

- `##` ~4k usages
- `#` ~20k usages
- `/*` ~6k usages
- `/**` 160 usages 

Choosing `/**` or subsets would cause minor conflicts within current nixpkgs. While this is NOT the main reason for the final decision, it MUST be considered.

## Just free text as a content format

While this allows the most freedom, it is usually considered the best option, not creating any restrictions.

- [RFC72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md) defines commonMark as the official documentation format.
This is why we decided to follow this convention. Writing plain text is still possible.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Migration path for nixpkgs comments.
- How to document the `arguments`. Should there be some markdown equivalent to `@param` i.e. `# Params`?

>     - Possible answer: Future RFC might need to clarify that.

Reviewer 6: Formally the RFC should make *some* decision, where postponing is a valid decision.

However, in my opinion that should block the design of the builtins. The language is meant to be stable. If we accept an incomplete design, we'll have to support an incomplete API **in addition to** a complete one, because the language is supposed to be reproducible - very backwards compatible. I can see an argument about incremental improvements, but I'm really not a fan of adding more tech debt to Nix.

I would suggest to only postpone this question if you have a very good reason to do so.

(nit: remove backticks around `arguments`)

Author: So in your opinion we should specify all reserved keywords such as e.g., `arguments`? 

The documentation team disliked the idea of having reserved keywords and proposed of leaving this open to the user. Nix will not be responsible for rendering anything in my opinion. The only role nix has there is to ensure that the user can retrieve the content. Rendering the comment itself can be done with any markdown tool. 

I had a talk with @tomberek and we both think that adding this as a `builtin` to the language is not the correct way. Instead we should maybe add an additional (yet experimental) command which can be called with something like: `nix doc --file my.nix path.to.foo`. Adding the builtin would (A) change the language and (B) allow nix to introspect itself which could be dangerous.

Reviewer 6: > So in your opinion we should specify all reserved keywords such as e.g., `arguments`?

Wait, does this refer to the nit?

> The documentation team disliked the idea of having reserved keywords and proposed of leaving this open to the user.

Fine by me.

-----

I was also thinking of syntax such as the following, which would affect a documentation builtin.

```nix
/** A function for using a thing. It works in a certain way. */
{ /** the thing */
  it,
  /** arbitrary other things to make it work differently */
  ...
}:
```

-----

> Adding the builtin would (A) change the language

That was also my concern. Adding to the language is fine, but it's hard-to-impossible to change anything after.

> and (B) allow nix to introspect itself which could be dangerous.

We already have introspection, so we've already accepted a degree of this danger.

> experimental feature

This allows the design to change and stabilize over time. If we're too concerned about introspection, we could perhaps turn it into a non-experimental setting that's off by default.

Author: What do you think about dropping the builtin idea and having a cli which should be easier to change in the future?

# Future work
[Future]: #future-work

## Migrate existing nixpkgs comments

Reformatting existing doc-comments in nixpkgs.

## nixpkgs Manual

The current nixpkgs manual needs to be adopted to this change.

## Native support in Nix

> - `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-comments.

Reviewer 7: Can we make a clearer argument of why Nix should do this? Otherwise, I'd make a weaker claim:

```suggestion
There have been efforts to add support for parsing doc comments to the Nix evaluator. These could be revived and adapted to the format proposed by this RFC.
```

> Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of scope for this rfc.

Related POCs:

- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/9054
- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652
- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5527
- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/commit/8e252320f52426c734883709eb398d2161c3fe82

## References

### Other Conventions

- [Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/comments.html#doc-comments)
- [Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/)
- [JSDoc](https://jsdoc.app/)
- [Go Doc Comments](https://go.dev/doc/comment)

### Related tools

- [Nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc)
- [Rustdoc](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/how-to-write-documentation.html)
- [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/)

## Related discussions

>  - https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2023-04-13-documentation-team-meeting-notes-41/27264)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2023-04-13-documentation-team-meeting-notes-41/27264
```

- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/3904
- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/228

- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5527
- https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652 

> [#1652](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652) gets closest what this RFC imagines, implementation is almost done. It certainly has some limitations, but got stuck on politics and diverging opinions about markdown and syntax rules. 

Reviewer 7: The tone of the last sentence is not very RFC-y IMO.

```suggestion
- [#1652](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652) gets closest what this RFC imagines; the implementation is almost done, at the time of writing this RFC.
```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[#1652](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652) gets closest what this RFC imagines, implementation is almost done. It certainly has some limitations, but was not merged due to uncertainty and complexity. 
```

---
feature: doc-strings
start-date: 2023-03-27
author: hsjobeki
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Standard for Doc-strings

Finally distinguish between doc-strings and comments.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

This RFC aims at improving consistency of in code documentation. (aka Doc-strings)

The community offers tools and methods (such as nixdoc, nix-doc, etc.) to write and process in-code documentation for functions and other code related atomic expressions.
This functionality is currently utilized to build a subset of documentation for nix functions. (e.g. nixpkgs.lib documentation via: [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc))
There is also [noogle](https://noogle.dev) that indexes subsets of nixpkgs based on the current comments.

> However the format of that __docs-strings__ is itself neither well documented nor standardized.

Reviewer: mentions of `doc-strings`and  `docs-strings` should be consistent, my recommendation is to use `doc-strings` or `doc-string`s

Author: Yep :+1: wasn't on purpose.

>
> Providing a formal skeleton, where sections can be extended by the nix community

## Proposed solution

```nix
# somefile.nix

    ## <Description or Tagline>
    ## 
    ## # Example
    ##
    ## <Comprehensive code>
    ## 
    ## # Type
    ##    
    ## <Type Signature>
    mapAttrs = f: s: #...
```

This is considered a possible solution because the following reasons:

- Good visual distinction between doc-strings and comments
- Clear rules and structure
- Saves vertical space
- Doesn't need termination (*/)
- Clear indentation rules. Following the __markdown__ convention.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

The following abstract rules describe how to write doc-strings.

> I'am very happy if you comment about whether we should use `## {content}` or `/** {content} */`
> I did write this RFC tailored towards `##` but using `/** */` is still an open discussion.

We must find one solution out of the following:

|  | 0 `##` | 1 `/** */`   |
|---|---|---|
| 0 `# {Keyword}` | `## # Example` | `/** # Example */` |
| 1 `@{Keyword}:`  | `# @Example:` |`/** @Example: */` |

Proposed Solution (0,0) => `##` For docstring body and markdown headings `# H1`

> ### Format Rules

Reviewer: maybe we should limit doc-strings to annotate only attribute names in attribute set and let-in bindings?

Author: Why would you only want to document sets? 
They are the most prominent points that need to be documented. But this also restricts the usage quite a lot. 
There might be less-known places that need docs for anonymous functions or other things that we didn't yet think of.

Reviewer: Otherwise we would need to define associativity for doc-strings, so we can know whether `docs` annotates `foo` or `foo bar baz`
```nix
## docs
foo bar baz
```

In rust, doc comments can only document things that are named. AFAIK javadoc has the same limitation

I didn't mention lambda parameters, but annotating those also sounds good to me. Can you give an example where documenting an anonymous function or things that are not attribute names would be helpful?

Author: I am not sure. 

https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix

I always wondered how to properly document mkDerviation.

Reviewer: good point, maybe we can make doc-strings have the lowest precedence when it comes to associativity, or just not allow it when it can be ambiguous, which will allow documenting anonymous functions

Author: I think i‘ll add your exact example and say the precedence is always lowest. (E.g. -1) 
So this would actually be a docstring for „foo bar baz“

| Keyword     |  Description  | Note |
| ---         |  ---          | --- |
| `Example`   | Starts the Example-block. Often contains comprehensive code examples | |
| `Type`      | Start the Type-block, it is any free text | Syntax may eventually be specified in the future. [preview](https://typednix.dev). |

### Blocks appear only once

This reduces complexity and avoids confusion if there is only one place for every concern.

### All Keywords live in this RFC

This ensures every keyword is documented.

### New Keywords

Ensures newly introduced keyword are discussed in this context first.

If they bring in more complex sub-features (like Types) those can be discussed in separate RFCs which are back-linked in the [keywords](#keywords) table. This helps to keep this overarching proposal clean and short.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

The following example illustrates the structure of doc-strings

- starting with `##`
- doesn't change the nix syntax

```nix
# Example - structure

> ##    <- Description content->
> ##    # Example
> ##    <- Some comprehensive code examples ->
> ##    # Type:
> ##    <- Type ->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## <- Description content->
## # Example
## <- Some comprehensive code examples ->
## # Type:
## <- Type ->
```

```

Example: old docs-strings. (To be changed by this RFC)

```nix
# lib/attrsets.nix

/* Create a new attribute set with `value` set at the nested attribute location specified in `attrPath`.
     Example:
       setAttrByPath ["a" "b"] 3
       => { a = { b = 3; }; }
     Type:
       setAttrByPath :: [String] -> Any -> AttrSet
  */
  setAttrByPath
```

Example: After changes.

```nix
# lib/attrsets.nix

## Create a new attribute set with `value` set at the nested attribute location specified in `attrPath`.
##
## # Example

> ##  setAttrByPath ["a" "b"] 3

Reviewer: this extra indentation is not very intuitive to me

# Design
[design]: #detailed-design

In the following we give a comprehensive overview to our decision that we've made. Detailed arguments for and against every decision can be found in the [Decisions](#Decisions) section

## CommonMark

**CommonMark according to [RFC 72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md) is the content of all doc-comments.**

Adopting CommonMark as the content for all doc-comments brings the benefits of widely accepted and understood documentation format in tech projects, while maintaining profitability and consistency within the Nix ecosystem by aligning with existing [NixOS/RFC-72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

## `/** */` is the doc-comment format

The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. A single choice provides the best developer experience and simplifies tooling.

## Placement

**The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the expression they are documenting.**

The following rules apply in descending order of precedence:

> - Doc-comments are placed before the documentable node. Only whitespace is allowed in between. ([Examples](#basic-examples)) 

Reviewer 8: I think it is somehow unclear that what is *documentable*. Examples here shows that they are "expressions", which can be evaluated and has a associated value. But can we document some language constructs that is not an expression? For example, lambda formal?

```nix
{
/** how to document `a`? */
a
} : 1
```

We actually do have this kind of documentation in nixpkgs, e.g. https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/fe1e9d524b7ac9fac5f8be3ea2a7d177a5a4b4dc/lib/options.nix#L68

Author: With our POC retrieving this kind of documentation is already possible. The challenge is finding the right formulation. We can conclude that it is not strictly expressions that are documentable.

I think i'll just clarify what `documentable nodes` are (by the state of this RFC).
We can extend the list in the future if we find specifications are missing.

- expressions
- lambda formals
- bindings

This should cover about 99% of all documentation use cases and (as far as i can tell) sufficient for nixpkgs.

- The documentation present before the `attribute path` describes the body of the attribute. ([Examples](#Attributes))
    - In case placement is ambiguous, the one closer to the body has higher precedence. ([Examples](#ambiguous-placement))
         

> - All partial functions of a curried lambda can share the same placement with the outermost lambda. ([Examples](#partial-lambda-functions)) 

Reviewer 8: Evaluated partial functions, or literally curried lambdas? 

```nix
rec {
  a = a: b: a + b;

  # can this lambda "a 1" share the same placement with "a: b: a + b"?
  b = a 1;
}
```

Author: Another example

```nix
  addOne = let
      /**Add docs*/
      add = x: y: y + x;
    in
      /**IGNORED*/
      add 1;
```
->
`Add docs`

This is not a problem you can still write:

```nix
  /**AddOne docs*/
  addOne = let
      add = x: y: y + x;
    in
      add 1;
```
->
`AddOne docs`

Author: @inclyc Does this answer your question, do we need to clearify the wording?

Reviewer 8: Thanks, feel free to mark this as resolved!

e.g.

The following is an idea for a problem that will arise if tools try to track doc-strings' positions and the location in the nixpkgs tree. (Although this problem is not nixpkgs specific)

```nix
#| This file is called somewhere that cannot be automatically tracked/is impossible to analyze statically.
#| The 'TreePath' override can be used by the docstring author to set a fixed path in the nixpkgs expression.
#| (This behavior will not be specified in this RFC)
#| @TreePath: pkgs.stdenv 

{...}:
{
    # returns something
}
```

# Future work
[future]: #future-work

- When extending nixdoc and/or writing dedicated parsers the following persons can assist: [@hsjobeki]

- There is an RFC under construction, that specifies the used syntax within the `Type`-Block. It depends on this RFC, as this RFC is the groundwork to provide a standardized field where additional rules can apply. Core-Team: [@hsjobeki]

- `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-strings. That way our users don't have to rely on nixpkgs or external tools. Those tools can still exist and provide more custom functionality, but it should be natively possible to document your nix expressions.

> - Every existing and future tool can implement against this RFC and rely on it.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Every existing and future tool can implement against this RFC and rely on it.

# References

- [Rustdoc](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/how-to-write-documentation.html)
```

Author: Thanks. Good idea. Forgot to add it.

---
feature: doc-strings
start-date: 2023-03-27
author: hsjobeki
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Standard for Docstring format

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Propose a standard format for Docblocks
```

> Wikipedia states:
> 
> > In programming, a docstring is a string literal specified in source code that is used, like a comment, to document a specific segment of code. Unlike conventional source code comments, or even specifically formatted comments like docblocks, docstrings are not stripped from the source tree when it is parsed and are retained throughout the runtime of the program. This allows the programmer to inspect these comments at run time, for instance as an interactive help system, or as metadata.

Reviewer 9: This can be moved/rewritten elsewhere.

```suggestion
```

# Motivation

> [motivation]: #motivation

Reviewer 9: A convincing `motivations` section (to me, at least :) ) looks like:

- start by describing the current state of the things
- pinpoint a specific drawback of it
- draws a small explanation why the drawback above is bad
- proposes a fix/improvement

#### nixpkgs - Dosctrings examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)
- more...

#### frameworks

- [dream2nix/utils](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/utils/config.nix)
- [dream2nix/templates/builder](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/templates/builders/default.nix)
- more... 

#### Other tools

Other tools that work directly with the nix AST and comments:

- [noogle](https://noogle.dev) - Nix API search engine. It allows to search functions and other expressions.
- [nix-doc](https://github.com/lf-/nix-doc) - A Nix developer tool leveraging the rnix Nix parser for intelligent documentation search and tags generation
- [manix](https://github.com/mlvzk/manix) - A fast CLI documentation searcher for nix.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

**Proposed Solution:**

> Use `##` For doc-comment body and markdown within

Reviewer 9: Being a bit pedantic, in Nix a Python-like comments can start in any column (going till the end of line).

Are you proposing any such comment as a possible doc-comment? Or only the ones that start in the first column?

```nix
let
   x = 1; ## this is not a doc-comment
   y = 2; ## this is not a doc-comment
in
## this is a doc-comment
  x+y
  ## this is not a doc-comment
```

| Markdown compatibility (also depends on indentation clarity) | Good, but visual conflicts with headings` #` | Poor | Medium |
| breaks when interrupted with newlines | Yes | No | ? |

**Proposed format:**

Use `##` to start a doc-comment. This allows clear visual separation from regular comments.
And provides a good compatibility with the strived markdown content.

### Refactoring note

nixpkgs comments:

- `##` ~4k usages (most of them are used for visual separation e.g. `###########`)
- `#` ~20k usages
- `/*` ~6k usages
- `/**` 160 usages (most of them are completely empty ?)

## General Headings

| Property / Approach | `# <Heading>` | `@<Heading>:` |
|---|---|---|
| Inspired by | Markdown | Doxygen |
| Changes the existing code by | Minor | Minor |
| Needs vertical space  | Recommended | No |
| Visual distinction from comments | Low | High |
| Markdown compatibility | Best | None |

**Proposed headings:**

Use markdown headings `# <Heading>`. This allows best compatibility with the already specified markdown/commonmark format. Allowing for easy and intuitive usage for comments.

## Consequences to not implementing this

> - By not implementing this feature, nix loses the ability for tool-generated documentation.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- By not implementing this feature, nix gains no ability for tool-generated documentation.
```

We can't lose something we didn't have to begin with :)

# Design
[design]: #detailed-design

In the following we give a comprehensive overview to our decision that we've made. Detailed arguments for and against every decision can be found in the [Decisions](#Decisions) section

## CommonMark

**CommonMark according to [RFC 72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md) is the content of all doc-comments.**

Adopting CommonMark as the content for all doc-comments brings the benefits of widely accepted and understood documentation format in tech projects, while maintaining profitability and consistency within the Nix ecosystem by aligning with existing [NixOS/RFC-72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

## `/** */` is the doc-comment format

The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. A single choice provides the best developer experience and simplifies tooling.

## Placement

**The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the documentable node.**

A **documentable node** can be:

- Expression 
- Binding 

> - Lambda Formal

Reviewer 4: I'd like to highlight the concern in https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145#discussion_r1374930801 again with more examples:

```nix
{
  f =
    let
      z = someExpensiveComputation;
    in
    /** Docs for x */
    x:
    /** Docs for y */
    y:
    x + 1;
}
```

I can imagine the doc comments for `x` and `y` to be hard to extract properly. They're really part of the function `f`, but not written as part of it.

And very similarly:
```nix
{

  incrementBy =
    /** The amount to increment by */
    amount:
    /** The number to increment */
    x:
    x + amount;
  
  # This is of type Int -> Int, how to document the argument?
  increment = incrementBy 1;
  
  # This works, but requires introducing an extra argument, which sacrifices evaluation performance in current Nix.
  increment =
    /** The number to increment by 1 */
    x:
    incrementBy 1 x;
}
```

How do I attach a doc comment to `increment` without introducing an extra unnecessary argument?

Another example comes [from the `lib.path` library I worked on](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/3f94ed960a414e31dd38de9a15bec5ed0f21e2fc/lib/path/default.nix#L200-L214):

```nix
  hasPrefix =
    path1:
    assert assertMsg
      (isPath path1)
      "lib.path.hasPrefix: First argument is of type ${typeOf path1}, but a path was expected";
    let
      path1Deconstructed = deconstructPath path1;
    in
      path2:
      assert assertMsg
        (isPath path2)
        "lib.path.hasPrefix: Second argument is of type ${typeOf path2}, but a path was expected";
      let
        path2Deconstructed = deconstructPath path2;
      in
```

The function takes two arguments, but the second argument is only available nested inside an `assert` and a `let in`.

I haven't thought about a better alternative, but I believe these cases might be problematic with the current proposal, since it depends on doc comments always being related to a syntax node, which doesn't necessarily correspond to the exposed interface.

Reviewer 4: Notably we only have this problem because Nix is all _implementation_. There's no interface description language such as libraries, modules and types, which most other languages have. And doc comments should be part of the interface, not the implementation.

Author: > Notably we only have this problem because Nix is all implementation.

Yes unfortunately there is no language specification. That is why we decided to use a lot of examples instead. Until the language gets specified.

> I'd like to highlight the concern in https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145#discussion_r1374930801 again with more examples

Are those examples inspired by the current nixdoc feature called 'argument documentation'? Argument documentation is removed completely I consider this the best approach. (I'll explain why)

I've corrected the example below.
```nix
{
  f =
    let
      z = someExpensiveComputation;
    in
    /** Docs for the lambda x: y: x+1*/
    x:
    y:
    x + 1;
}
```
The nixdoc feature 'argument documentation' is not specified by this RFC. Indeed one could say that it is removed. There are no arguments in the nix language. Only lambdas, where every lambda has an argument. It makes more sense to use those placements to document the whole lambda. (What you consider argument documentation, is removed, instead we open the possibility for `lambda formals` -> `{a,b,c,...}` to be documentable.

> How do I attach a doc comment to increment without introducing an extra unnecessary argument?

```nix
{
  /** Docs could also be here for convinence (as specified)*/
  incrementBy =
    /**
      A function that increments.
      
      Arguments
      - [amount] The amount to increment by
      - [x] The number that is incremented
    */
    amount:
    x:
    x + amount;
  
  # This is of type Int -> Int, how to document the argument?
  /**
      A function that increments by one
      
      Arguments
      - [x] The number that is incremented
  */
  increment = incrementBy 1;
  
  # This is called eta-wrapping
  # Don't do this. as you already said it has performance impacts. Just document like shown above.
  increment =
    /** The number to increment by 1 */
    x: incrementBy 1 x;
}
```

## Why 'argument documentation' is removed (compared to nixdoc)

Lets say you want to document: 

- an anonymous lambda `a: a` (id function)
- an argument of a lambda ` id = a: a`  (id function)

We now specified that every lambda can have its doc-comment right before the lambda itself

`/**Doc for a: a*/a: a`

If we continue with the `nixdoc` argument documentation this placement could not be used.

`/**Doc for argument a*/a: a`

Both placements are exactly the same. Where we consider the first one to be correct. Please document arguments in the doc-comment. Or alternatively use `{/**Doc for formal a*/a, ...}: `.

Author: Maybe we should point out, that this rfc will change the developer experience for writing documentation if you are used to the current nixdoc inspired format. Biggest change might be refactoring the so called 'argument documentation'

Author: Also your 'advanced' examples simplifies to:

```nix
/**
Check if a path has another path as prefix

# Arguments
- [path1] document 
- [path2] document
*/
hasPrefix =
    path1:
    assert assertMsg
      (isPath path1)
      "lib.path.hasPrefix: First argument is of type ${typeOf path1}, but a path was expected";
    let
      path1Deconstructed = deconstructPath path1;
    in
      path2:
      assert assertMsg
        (isPath path2)
        "lib.path.hasPrefix: Second argument is of type ${typeOf path2}, but a path was expected";
      let
        path2Deconstructed = deconstructPath path2;
      in
```

Don't expect complex features like automatic infering of arguments, write correct documentation yourself. Currently no tool can handle that for you. Automatically infering arguments and constructing documentation from multiple places is super complex as you already pointed out.

Reviewer 4: That wasn't a great example, you're right. I do still think a piece is missing here, the [previous example](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145#discussion_r1374930801) doesn't seem to work very well. Another example where we might have problems is with functions taking functions, like `lib.fileset.fileFilter`, which already currently has to construct a manual listing for arguments of its predicate argument: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/85f1ba3e51676fa8cc604a3d863d729026a6b8eb/lib/fileset/default.nix#L284-L326

In such a case documentation writers would have to manually create anchors to make parts linkable, which is probably something we don't want.

While I think this could be doable, I don't think this should be a blocker for this RFC.

Author: > That wasn't a great example, you're right. I do still think a piece is missing here, the https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145#discussion_r1374930801 doesn't seem to work very well.

Yes you're right. Not everything is intuitively documentable. There are limitations. 
I prefer to thinking of lambdas as enclosed atomic expressions that should document their behavior. It would be nice to somehow also automatically document the returned values. Which is possible, but with certain limitations and it gets very complex if you start involving conditionals, where the documentable-node is only visible under certain conditions.

I'm sure there are solutions to this problem, but they involve some handcrafting of specific tooling on top of this rfc, and some efforts from the user, making those things discoverable.

>  construct a manual listing arguments of its predicate argument: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/85f1ba3e51676fa8cc604a3d863d729026a6b8eb/lib/fileset/default.nix#L284-L326

As said I'd unify the documentation to be on the lambda only.

Something like:
```
/*
    Filter a file set to only contain files matching some predicate.

     # Arguments
     
     - [predicate]   The predicate ...
     - [fileset]  The file set to filter based on the predicate function
    
  */
  fileFilter =
    predicate:
    fileset:
```

You can utilize the power of markdown, and have an extra section for the `predicate` if it is more complex and requires extra explanation. 

Unfortunately specifying the argument reference syntax is out of scope for this rfc, I'll start another one later to define fundamental references and markdown features. (If it is not a tooling question)

Reviewer 6: I like the bracket syntax for parameters, as it looks like a markdown identifier. A natural "extension" would be to support `[label](identifier)`, effectively renaming the argument for the purpose of documentation.
This is entirely valid because **positional arguments don't actually have a name in the function interface**. Any names we do give them are effectively pseudocode.

Nixdoc does not recognize this fact, causing some developers to apply elaborate renaming to keep the docs clean, even if they need to preprocess an argument (which normally degrades the intended identifier).

I suppose the alternative is to only accept markdown labels and ignore the names used in the implementation. This would seem error-prone - too easy to accidentally switch them up, with no way to check against this in the tooling.

------

Another question: Is it possible to intentionally **document fewer arguments** than the implementation?
For instance, extends is usually thought of as returning a function, rather than being a single curried function.
(The returned function goes from self to self; suitable for passing to fix, which is then responsible for instantiating an overlay. Docs are WIP)

```
  extends = f: rattrs: self: let super = rattrs self; in super // f self super;
```

But typical use is along the lines of

```
  fix (extends f g)
```

Author: > I like the bracket syntax for parameters, as it looks like a markdown identifier. 

:heart: 

> A natural "extension" would be to support [label](identifier)
> ...
> Is it possible to intentionally document fewer arguments than the implementation?

Those questions are not answered by the RFC. It doesn't include any markdown extensions or styling rules. It is unfortunate. I try to keep the scope manageable and focused on the minimal requirements, although I always have to resist the temptation not to define those nice (to have) features.

For now i think this is a tooling question, whether the blessed tools supports certain extensions.

> positional arguments don't actually have a name in the function interface

Yes that bothers me too. Often our documentation refers to semantic names, which is wrong. It should correctly be the order in which the arguments must be supplied, from the perspective of the user.  This means if `self` is not passed or accessed by the caller. It should not be documented on the interface.

Author: @infinisil. Are your concerns resolved? 

I put a sentence in the migration section, that this RFC uses a different "mental mode"l than the former `nixdoc` one.

> Note: The current nixdoc feature 'Function arguments' uses a different mental model than this RFC. Arguments must now be explicitly documented inside of the lambda documentation.

The following rules apply in descending order of precedence:

> - Doc-comments are placed before the **documentable node**. Only whitespace is allowed in between. ([Examples](#basic-examples)) 

Reviewer 10: "Only white space" is a bit surprising, I would expect “white space or non-doc comments”.

That’s the rule Rust uses, and it is practically useful — oftentimes, you want to document both the public API with a doc comment, as well as private impl details with a non-doc comment.

Author: Also thought of this. Maybe we should indeed allow regular comments too. Thanks for the suggestion if rust uses this convention we should maybe follow the same.
I was concerned too, because in nixpkgs.lib there are many 
`# TODO: @user fix this sometimes later.`
The reason we put the rule there in the first place was because it visually interrupts the connection to the documentable node.

- The documentation present before the `attribute path` describes the body of the attribute. ([Examples](#Attributes))
    - In case placement is ambiguous, the one closer to the body has higher precedence. ([Examples](#ambiguous-placement))
         

> - All partial functions of a curried lambda can share the same placement with the outermost lambda. ([Examples](#partial-lambda-functions))

Reviewer 11: Nitpick:

```suggestion
- All partial applications of a curried lambda can share the same placement with the outermost lambda. ([Examples](#partial-lambda-functions))
```

And elsewhere.

"Partial function" means a function which might not terminate (i.e. might go into an infinite loop).  What you're describing here is a *partially applied* function.

- (+) Allows copy-paste from and to markdown files. We allow easy refactoring if documentation arises and needs to be split into separate files.
- (-) Strictly binding doc comments content to commonMark might restrict users.
    - (+) Users/Tools can still use regular comments or develop alternative solutions.
- (-) CommonMark does not specify the current rich features from nixdoc, such as predefined sections and structures that could be used as a source for automated toolings. Such as types for type-checking or examples to run automated-tests
    - (+) Future tools can still build their conventions on top of this RFC. They might not directly specify them in an RFC but be a tool developers choose for a specific codebase. However, we have yet to get that tools. So it is good when rich features remain unspecified.
  
</details>

## Single-line doc-comments (do not exist)

**Observing**: Nix offers two variants of comments; single- (`#`) and multi-line comments (`/* */`). There may be use cases where it is desirable to have a form of single-line comments subtyped for doc-comment purposes.

**Considering**: Single-line comment for documentation. (Starting a doc-comment with `##`)

> **Decision**: Single-line comments (starting with `##`) **cannot be used** in any form for documentation puposes.

Reviewer 11: Kinda sad that this option won't be available.

Doxygen has `//<`, Haskell has `-- ^`, and they are really useful.

Author: The main reason we decide to omit `##` was because of the visual conflict with markdowns `# Heading`
Its sad yes, but i think its okay. The benefit is, that there is only one doc-comment syntax which will benefit the consistency.

We still understand the benefits (as mentioned in the section) single line doc comments would have.

Reviewer 4: I don't think it would be ambiguous if you have spacing, like
```nix
## Some paragraph
## 
## # Some title
## Some paragraph
```

It could be a requirement for single-line doc comments to start with `## ` (including the space)

Author: Okay I'll bring up the topic to the final shepherd meeting. 
@amjoseph-nixpkgs @infinisil  whats your personal opinion about this? If we define '## ' with whitespace this also means '####' which are used in a lot of places for visual seperation are not doc-comments which i think is desireable.

Reviewer 4: I think the RFC should at least be changed to not forbid single-line doc comments, but I'd be totally on-board with also defining that this is how single-line doc comments need to look like.

I do think this is a somewhat significant addition to the RFC, I'd prefer another FCP when the shepherd team is done discussing this.

Reviewer 11: > The main reason we wanted to omit `##`

No problem; just use some other sigil instead.

I don't have any opinion on *what* sequence of characters ought to be used to indicate "this comment documents the thing before it, not the thing after it".  Just that some sequence exists.

Author: > This comment documents the thing before it, not the thing after it

Oh (understood you wrong) You mean the possibility of placing doc-comments **after** the `documentable-node`.

Like:

```nix
{
   a = 1; #< The number one
   b = x: y: x * y; #< The product function
}
```

We didn't specify that and we very likely will not add it to the RFC.

I did consider this in a very early stage of this rfc but after talking with some people we came up with the decision to not include that. it is still possible to document everything, which is the goal of the RFC.

If you think its necessary, we can provide an extra "decision" section, why we did not specify it.

Reviewer 8: > placing doc-comments after

FWIW, this is somehow hard to implement this. Because there must be a complex rule to specify which node the comment belongs to, and also cannot be implemented by single-pass parser actions.

For example, for the code showed above by @hsjobeki 

We see the comment `#< The number one` should be attached to `1`, before the comment. But why cannot it attach to `b`? I only see trivia tokens between them. You may say: hmm, there is a newline `\n`, okay, so this token becomes a different from other whitespaces.

Reviewer 8: > visual conflict with markdowns

Maybe we can choose `#!` to start single-line doc-comments ?

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (+) It Would be consistent with providing variants for both nix comments.

> - (-) Doc-comments should have only one variant to reduce complexity.  

Reviewer 4: These (+)/(-) seem flipped around, I'd expect (+) to be _for_ the decision and (-) to be _against_ the decision, which doesn't seem to be the case.

Author: Changed. +/- is now relative to the 'decision'

It allows distinguishing between regular and doc comments. Having distinction is essential because arbitrary code comments should not end up in generated documentation.

> Hint: Generating static documentation is controvert topic in nixpkgs. We found that it is impossible to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve the evaluation of expressions in some way.

## Current State

Currently, Nix does not have doc comments. Over time there evolved certain conventions, but they were never formally specified.
Within this RFC, we want to clarify which convention we should use, harmonize and improve the format for doc-comments to achieve the envisioned goals.

We use a tool called [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc) to use a 'doc-comment'- like functionality, which allows us to build a subset of static documentation of the `nixpkgs.lib` functions.

The format of a doc-comment was, however, never specified. The nix community does not understand the rules enforced by `nixdoc`, which we believe is one of the reasons for its lack of adoption.

Here is an example of the format understood by *nixdoc*:

```nix
# nixpkgs/lib/attrsets.nix

{

>   /* <Description Field>
>      Example:
>      <Comprehensive Code example>
>      Type:
>      <Type signature>
>   */
>   AttrFunc =

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  /* <Attr Description>
  
     Type:
     <Type signature>
     
     Example:
     <Comprehensive Code example>
  */
  Attr =
```

### Lack of having an agreed format

The Nix community interprets the outer format and content of doc-comments differently. Within nixpkgs, several conventions and patterns still need to be harmonized. Some are compatible with nixdoc, while others do not and decide upon their conventions. We immediately observe one clear thing: Most of them utilize some form of markdown, even if the content is not rendered.

In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not specified**.

The *nixdoc*-tool requires a somewhat consistent format, but the basic format was never specified and cannot be enforced in parts of nixpkgs where nixdoc is currently not applied.

Extending the scope of *nixdoc* is not the primary goal. Instead, we should find formal rules for writing *doc-comments*. Tools like *nixdoc* can then implement against this RFC instead of the format relying on nixdoc implementation details.

### Impossible to differentiate from regular comments

The format does not allow any distinction between doc comments and regular comments.

Having a distinction would allow us to

1. Find all comments that are part of the documentation
2. Render them in the documentation format

> 3. Connect the documentation to the exact places in the Nix code. 

Reviewer 7: These are all possible without introducing a distinct format for doc-comments though, right?

Author: I just wanted to let you know that I can follow your arguments.

> Couldn't this RFC be simplified by just stating that doc-comments:
>   - are block comments immediately before an attribute
>   - are formatted with CommonMark
>  - have Type and Example fields

# Are block comments immediately before an attribute?

How would you find all doc comments if you cannot distinguish them from regular comments?
So this would mean all multiline comments are doc comments if they follow specific placement rules.
I wanted to avoid that and follow Rust's approach by adding one more character, clearly showing "this is a doc-comment". Otherwise, you would make multiline comments almost impossible for any "non-doc-purpose". 

Did you want to suggest that every multiline comment is always a doc-comment, and there are no regular multiline comments anymore?

# Are formatted with commonMark?

Finally, that is a point that all agreed on. :)

# Have Type and Example fields?

I recently joined one of the documentation team meetings, and we discussed that a bit.
The outcome was that (1) example and type should also be commonMark headings.
(2) this RFC should not specify those fields in advance. It might be a convention in nixpkgs. If we'd only allow `Example` and `Type`, that would be pretty restrictive, and I've seen some PRs and threads where people used other headings. So the best choice we'd come up with is to say: "the entire content is commonMark". This is the least restrictive and still allows us to follow that convention without enforcing it.

Reviewer 7: About your first questions: how does Go find all doc-comments? AFAIU, they just assume that all comments before a to-level literal are doc-comments, and the `go doc` tool extacts them accordingly. From the docs:

> “Doc comments” are comments that appear immediately before top-level package, const, func, type, and var declarations with no intervening newlines. Every exported (capitalized) name should have a doc comment.

> The [go doc](https://go.dev/cmd/go#hdr-Show_documentation_for_package_or_symbol) command looks up and prints the doc comment for a given package or symbol. (A symbol is a top-level const, func, type, or var.)

About your third: what other headings have you seen in the wild? I remember we tried to come up with something other than `Example` and `Type` and we couldn't. Would be curious to see what you've found.

Reviewer 12: > About your third: what other headings have you seen in the wild? I remember we tried to come up with something other than `Example` and `Type` and we couldn't. Would be curious to see what you've found.

Given that `rustdoc` has been referenced, it might be interesting to compare Rust RFCs [505](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/ef26c15140f0530ad05d59253f0527e5384a7454/text/0505-api-comment-conventions.md) and [1574](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/ef26c15140f0530ad05d59253f0527e5384a7454/text/1574-more-api-documentation-conventions.md), which, among other things, define a standard set of such headings for Rust: Examples, Panics, Errors, Safety, Aborts, Undefined Behavior.  I think the "Safety" and "Undefined Behavior" would be unneeded for Nix.  "Errors", for Nix, would say what return values of a function count as error values and under what conditions the function will return those values.  "Panics", for Nix, would be "Exceptions" and say what exceptions a function may `throw` and under what conditions it will `throw` them.  "Aborts" would be the same but for `abort`.  It may make sense to merge "Exceptions" and "Aborts".  Assertions imply a type of abort.  Functions that don't use `throw`, `abort`, or `assert` would omit these sections.

Reviewer 13: I think this RFC doesn't specify any further format inside the doc comments (other that it's commonmark). What fields to have in there, if at all, should be another bikeshed after this PR IMHO.

- Outer format rules to allow distinction between regular comments and doc-comments
- Inner format rules that describe the required format of the content. 

However, both concerns relate closely to each other; It makes sense and reduces bureaucracy to address that in a single RFC.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The following are the envisioned goals.

- Be able to generate documentation from code for any nix expression.
- Be able to distinguish between documentation-relevant comments and unrelated comments.
- Make doc comments easy to write and read
- Be able to parse and render doc comments nicely
- Standardize a format for doc comments that further RFCs can extend

This RFC is a significant change to existing documentation conventions.
It allows distinguishing between regular and doc comments. Having distinction is essential because arbitrary code comments should not end up in generated documentation.

> Hint: Generating static documentation is controvert topic in nixpkgs. We found that it is impossible to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve the evaluation of expressions in some way.

## Current State

> Currently, Nix does not specify doc comments. Over time there evolved certain conventions, But the nix-community never specified those.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Currently, Nix does not have doc comments. Over time there evolved certain conventions, but they were never formally specified.
```

Nix-Community is a sibling organization. Better avoid confusion.

Also, remove some redundancy.

Within this RFC, we want to clarify which convention we should use, harmonize and improve the format for doc-comments to achieve the envisioned goals.

> We use a tool called [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc) to use a `doc-comment'- like functionality, which allows us to build a subset of static documentation of the `nixpkgs.lib` functions.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
We use a tool called [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc) to use a 'doc-comment'- like functionality, which allows us to build a subset of static documentation of the `nixpkgs.lib` functions.
```

The format of a doc-comment was, however, never specified. The nix community does not understand the rules enforced by `nixdoc`, which we believe is one of the reasons for its lack of adoption.

Here is an example of the format understood by *nixdoc*:

```nix
# nixpkgs/lib/attrsets.nix

{
  /* <Description Field>
     Example:
     <Comprehensive Code example>
     Type:
     <Type signature>
  */
  AttrFunc =
    # <Desribe arg1>
    arg1:
    # <Describe arg2>
    arg2:
    
    # ... implementation
}
```

## Current problems

> ### Lack of having an agreed Format

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
### Lack of having an agreed format
```

> The Nix community interprets the outer format and content of doc-comments differently. Within nixpkgs, several conventions and patterns still need to be harmonized. Some are compatible with nixdoc, while others do not and decide upon their conventions. We immediately observe one clear thing: Most of them utilize some form of markdown, even if the content is not rendered.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
The Nix community interprets the outer format and content of doc-comments differently. Within nixpkgs, several conventions and patterns still need to be harmonized. Some are compatible with nixdoc, while others are not use other styles. We immediately observe one clear thing: Most of them utilize some form of markdown, even if the content is not rendered.
```

I don't quite understand what you wanted to say here. Maybe this?

Reviewer 14: I read original in diff as ", while others — do not, and instead opt for own conventions." or in other words "Some of them compatible with nixdoc, but not all.".

In suggested content ", while others are not use other styles." sounds like missing "and" to avoid reading "are not use". E.g.  ", while others — are not, and use other styles".

In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not specified**.

> The *nixdoc*-tool enforces a somewhat consistent format, but the basic format was never specified and cannot be enforced in parts of nixpkgs where nixdoc is currently not applied.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
The *nixdoc*-tool requires a somewhat consistent format, but the basic format was never specified and cannot be enforced in parts of nixpkgs where nixdoc is currently not applied.
```

- more

#### frameworks

- [dream2nix/utils](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/utils/config.nix)
- [dream2nix/templates/builder](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/templates/builders/default.nix)
- more

#### Current tools

Other tools that work directly with the nix AST and comments.
Those would strategically benefit from this RFC, even if it means refactoring and migration efforts.

- [noogle](https://noogle.dev) - Nix API search engine. It allows searching functions and other expressions.
- [nix-doc](https://github.com/lf-/nix-doc) - A Nix developer tool leveraging the rnix Nix parser for intelligent documentation search and tags generation
- [manix](https://github.com/mlvzk/manix) - A fast CLI documentation searcher for Nix.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Each subsection here contains a decision along with arguments and counter-arguments for (+) and against (-) that decision.

> Note: This RFC does not promote any tool; It focuses only on the format, not implementation. At the same time, this RFC must be technically feasible.

## Discontinue nixdoc's custom format

> **Observing**: Nixdoc currently provides some format that can generate documentation from a small fraction of files in nixpkgs, Namely the files for `.lib` functions. The folder provides a consistent community convention that allows the building of static documentation. Applying nixdoc to files outside that directory is only partially possible due to the lack of a standard doc-comment format. 

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
**Observing**: Nixdoc currently provides some format that can generate documentation from a small fraction of files in nixpkgs, namely the files for `.lib` functions. The folder uses a consistent convention that allows the building of static documentation. Applying nixdoc to files outside that directory is only partially possible due to the lack of a standard doc-comment format. 
```

> 

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
```

**Considering**: Should we propose the `nixdoc` format as a community standard?

**Decision**: Discontinue nixdoc's custom format in favor of using something more generic.

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (+) Stays primarily compatible with the currently used comments in lib.

>     - (-) Outside the ./lib folder, nixodc is not a convention. 

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
    - (-) Outside the ./lib directory, nixodc is not a convention. 
```

- (-) Is not widely understood.

> - (-) Is not widely used. (e.g., Outside the /lib folder)

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
- (-) Is not widely used. (e.g., Outside the /lib directory)
```

- (-) The format is specific, should be more generic, and follow established conventions. (e.g., Markdown, Doxygen, JSdoc, Haddock)
- (-) The format is too complex and needs a whole list of complex rules to describe the exact format and content rules; this can also be observed in many false-formatted comments that do not render correctly.
    - (-) The sections are implicitly continued.
    - (-) The predefined section headers/keywords are very close to natural language and may accidentally be used.
        - (-) Syntax to start new sections does not follow conventions (e.g., `Example:`) In contrast JSdoc defines `@Example`; Markdown `# Example`; Doxygen `@example`; Haskell-Haddock `>>>`
    - (-) The content is implicitly rendered differently depending on predefined rules. Those rules need to be understood/feel natural.

> - (+) It Is already quite established and has some adoptions outside the `/lib` folder.

Reviewer 13: This contradicts the argument above, of it not being widely used outside /lib.

> - (+) It Is already quite established and has some adoptions outside the `/lib` folder.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
- (+) It Is already quite established and has some adoptions outside the `/lib` directory.
```

- (-) Some multiline comments become doc-comments, but it is unclear which comments have such a property.
    
</details>

## `/**` to start a doc-comment

> **Observing**: Doc-comments' outer format should be a distinctive subset of regular comments. Nevertheless, it should allow native writing without an ide or full-blown-language servers.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
**Observing**: Doc-comments' outer format should be a distinctive subset of regular comments. Nevertheless, it should allow native writing without an IDE or editor support.
```

It's not the job of LSP to describe how multiline docstrings are prefixed.

**Considering**: `/** {content} */` where `{content}` is the inner format which is discussed later.

> **Decision**: use `/** {content} */` as the outer format.

Reviewer 13: How do multiline comments look like? Are `*` added in front of each line, like in Javadoc, or not? Maybe provide an example for it as well?

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (+) It is mostly compatible with the currently used multiline comments.
- (+) Is a strict subset of multiline comments, which allows multiline documentation natively.

> - (+) Does not need Language Server (LSP) support for productive usage. (In contrast to, e.g., `##`)

Reviewer 13: Editor support, not LSP.

Also, this is the first mention of `##`, which means fresh readers of this RFC probably don't understand what this is about.

- (-) Unclear if complete documentation might also need backward references. 
    - (-), e.g., rust uses backward references only at the top of file comments.
    - (+) Nix files can only have ONE expression; the next AST Node, in case of top-of-file comments, is thus always only that one expression. (Unlike in Rust)
- (-) Tools need to be smart enough to understand asignments `=` and other forms of creating names for anonymous expressions. (e.g., `callPackage` and `import` )
    - (+) Tools can still come up with other solutions that do not involve calculating everything dynamically from nix code but could also involve a static configuration.
    - (+) The whole `tool point` is an implementation detail as long as it is not impossible. The current tool, `nixdoc`, already proves that it is possible to have static documentation to a certain degree.

</details>

## Single-line doc-comments (do not exist)

**Observing**: Nix offers two variants of comments; single- (`#`) and multi-line comments (`/* */`). There may be use cases where it is desirable to have a form of single-line comments subtyped for doc-comment purposes. 

**Considering**: Single-line comment for documentation.

> **Decision**: Single-line comments **cannot be used** in any form for documentation puposes.

Reviewer 13: This should probably clarify you're talking about the comment syntax of single-line comments, not about the contents themselves having to be more than one line. The `/** {content} */` is a single line.

Author: Yes good point. I am talking about the „#“ variant of a comment. 
I should clarify it better

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (-) Doc-comments should have only one variant to reduce complexity.  
- (-) documentation will likely take up more than one line.
- (-) If documentation grows bigger than one line, refactoring into a multiline-doc-comment must occur.
- (+) It Would be consistent with providing variants for both nix comments.
- (+) Offer the choice.
- (o) Single lines can also be concatenated to form multi-line documentation.
- (+) Takes up less vertical space
- (-) Visually confusing when every line starts with a reserved character.
    - (-) Potential visual conflicts with the content
- (+) Indentation of the content is clear.

</details>

## Doc-comment examples

> The following examples demonstrate the concrete usage scenarios:

Reviewer 14: Not sure what is difference between this and  `## Examples`` section.

If it is section for generic example, then we probably should indicate that without saying "concrete usage scenarios" as there already section for "emphasize the previously discussed characteristics" that seems to be demonstrating concrete examples.

Author: Not sure either ;) It seems i have duplicated the headings. Thanks

`somefile.nix`

~~~nix
{
  /**
  Documentation for mapAttrs
  
  # Example
  
  ```
  mapAttrs {attr = "foo"; } ...
  ```
  
  # Type
  
  ```
  mapAttrs :: a -> b -> c

>   ```

Reviewer 14: Should we support anonymous type signatures in order to support anonymous functions/expressions?

If sections in these examples are just provisional and their content will be clarified in other RFCs, then we might want to state it explicitly.

Author: Yes. That is indeed a good question. I've been playing 
with typing signatures quite a bit.

This RFC doesn't focus on how to use types in comments.

I think I pointed out: A doc-comment can relate to any expression, whether anonymous or not. 

Further RFCs can extend that and maybe bring a format for types.

  
  */

>   mapAttrs = f: s: <...>;

Author: I initially formulated this decision because I wanted to specify only abstract placement possibilities. I was not tying that RFC to specific AST implementations.

In a concrete implementation that I'm working on. This is interpreted as follows:

-> Doc comments can appear in two places.
```nix
# (1 directly next to a value) To support anonymous expressions.
{
  foo = /** Doc */ bar: bar;
}

# (2  Above attrName the value gets assigned to) To support named expressions. (Also most common and intuitive place )
{
  /** Doc */
  foo = bar: bar;
}
```

Do you have any suggestions to formulate that abstractly?

>   mapAttrs = f: s: <...>;

Reviewer 14: I'm fine with that. If you are looking for more generic options, it could as well be:

> Doc-comments refer to the **immediately** preceded expression or attribute/name expression is bound to.

In case if it is limited to only attrset, then I would keep only "attribute". If it only limited to nodes with `=`, then mentioning it like in your example might be essential.

Worth to consider also cases:

```nix
let
  /** Doc */
  foo = bar: bar;
in {
  other = foo;  # ⇐ Inherits documentation?
  inherit foo;  # ⇐ and in this case?
}
```

```nix
let
  foo = bar: bar;
in {
  /** Doc */
  inherit foo;  # ⇐ will it get attached doc?
}
```

>   mapAttrs = f: s: <...>;

Author: Yes, your first example got everything right.
The documentation is attached to the value `Lambda<bar: bar>` 

So both "other" and "foo" have "Doc" as a doc-string. 
Because both are just references to the value. 
 
But this goes into implementation details.

I can provide you that early screenshot, though:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/50398876/235364929-951f3e74-0079-475a-ba59-0ddd1ad44737.png)

Checkout [This wip PR](https://cl.tvl.fyi/c/depot/+/8530) if you want to experiment with it,

}
~~~

## Examples

This section contains examples for the different use cases we would end up with; Visualize them and emphasize the previously discussed characteristics.

### Attribute bindings 

`somefile.nix`

> ~~~nix

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
```nix
```

Author: problem is that I used ``` for the examples within the nix code block. Markdown has the ~~~ variant which allows usage of ``` within. Doesn't this render correctly on your editor?

Reviewer 15: Note that if you need to nest code blocks, you can use more than 3 backticks for the outer block, like:
`````
````foo
And an inner block:
```bar
Inner
```
Back to outer block
````
`````

Author: Thanks. I didn't know that. Changed it then. 

Noob question: What is the reason for not using ~~~?

Reviewer 15: I guess it's another way yes, I honestly never used it, and rarely see it used either

Reviewer 13: I wasn't aware ~~~ existed at all. The "more than 3 backticks" solution sounds nicer IMHO

{
  /**
  mapAttrs is a well-known function 
  
  # Examples
  
  "`Nix

>   some code examples

Author: > Besides that, it would be nice to have an optional output section

I guess you mean to have something like `->` or `>>>` 
to indicate what an example's evaluation should yield. So that we could unit-test our examples.

tbh. I don't think this should be targeted within this RFC (keep the scope small and clean; And address only one thing) 

But you could write tooling for that and base your own RFC on this one.

>   some code examples

Reviewer 14: Yeah. I agree.  
I just thought that if we provide code examples this RFC do not cover, we could have both with omitted output and with output present as some functions in `/lib` do have it as well.   
Even without RFC coverage, example would help to have less variations as it likely will be followed in same way as currently it is practice of modeling comments after lib.attrsets. And migration of current comments in `/lib` to new format would touch on this topic anyway.

>   some code examples

Author: What format would you suggest?

Hint: it should be tool parseable, it cannot be -> as this is already a token from nix (Token_Implication). 

Then we can provide some examples without specifying the format

>   some code examples

Reviewer 14: As it is not subject of this RFC - it can be any. But it is exactly as you said. It should be parseable in order for automating changes to whatever we decide later.  
If we are using code blocks, then it might look like
````markdown
# Examples
```nix
2 + 3
```
```output
5
```
```nix
"hi\nthere\n"
```
```output-raw
hi
there
```
````
or to save space maybe
````markdown
# Examples
```nix
2 + 3
# => 5
```
```nix
"hi\nthere\n"
# raw => hi
# there
```
````

>   some code examples

Author: How would you test:
Function call the needs other stuff in their scope? Like e.g lib.mapAttrs‘ 

If i used some example code i‘d use only one single md code fence maybe with some special annotations

And seperate the output from the input with => 
Then i‘d run something like proptest (its a rust crate) to check if the output matches

>   some code examples

Reviewer 14: I'm familiar with Haddock a bit. I think all examples acts as a REPL session and you can re-use any bindings from previous example. There is also `$setup` section outside of particular documentation if you need to keep something hidden and shared across multiple exported symbols. E.g.

````markdown
```nix
with import ../.;
lib.attrset.attrNames { x = 41; }
# => [ "x" ]
```
````

Anyway. Solving problems of doctest is a different RFC as I understand 😛

Reason why I want example is so more people would model their tests after it and it will be easier to migrate to different format with help of tooling.  
Since no one will tailor those examples for doctesting right now - I wouldn't expect them to work even if there will be right format described, but no tooling to validate it.

  ```
  
  */
  mapAttrs = f: s: #...
}

> ~~~

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
```
```

### NixOS Module documentation 

> Note: NixOS Modules also can produce documentation from their interface declarations. However, this does not include a generic description and usage examples.

`myModule.nix`
~~~nix
/**

>   This is a custom module.

Author: There is no reason. I messed up consistency.
But also, it does not matter. As indentation follows nix's multiline string logic (`''`)

  
  "`Nix
  {
     plus = import ./function.nix;
  }
  ```
  
  (Future) native Nix or community tools provide 
  implementations to track doc-comments within the Nix evaluator.
  Documentation of `sum` can then be inferred. 
  This still needs to be specified/implemented!

*/
{a, b}:
{
  sum = a + b;
}
~~~

### Anonymous expression documentation 

`exp.nix`
~~~nix
/**
  This is an anonymous string.
 
  It is the documentation for the "anonymous expression" use case.
  
  Although this example is relatively superficial, there might be use cases.
*/
"-p=libxml2/include/libxml2"
~~~

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Changes the existing comments inside the code base.

This could be automated. (e.g., via codemod)

Also, this affects only the `lib` folder and a few other places currently used to build the documentation.

## Changes in the `nixdoc' tooling are required. 

It remains an open question that needs to be tried;

Can we still build the current Nixos manuals with the new standard?

- We can wait to change everything.
- Migration can happen in small steps.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

## All considered outer formats
    

> | Property / Approach | `##` | `/** */` | `Javadoc` | `/*\|` or `/*^`  |

Reviewer 13: It might be some of this here actually breaks rendering of the rest of the text?

Author: Where do you have rendering issues? I am viewing it in GitHub and in vs-code. Both look good. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/50398876/235355957-fa67964b-ed7c-4577-8dbf-3ddb1b67b934.png)

Reviewer 13: This was in the "Files changed" view, when looking at the literal markdown and its syntax highlighting. It might be just a rendering bug on GitHub's side, if it renders fine.

Author: Ah, syntax highlighting is bugged sometimes. It doesn't look at the real markdown AST, it is just regex under the hood. Which fails to highlight this correctly I guess.

Reviewer 14: I think syntax highlighting was affected by unbalanced ticks/quotes. See [this comment](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145/files/c30cb3331c15c4e6980150c4a5a07e1fc246eeac#r1181132755). Right now it looks ok in diff.

|---|---|---|---|---|
| Inspired by | Rust | Current nixpkgs.lib | C++/Java/Javascript | Haskell Haddock |
| Changes the existing code by | Much | Less | Even More | Less |
| Needs Termination | No | Yes | Yes | Yes |

> | Indentation | Clear | like Nix's multiline strings, thus **Intuitive** | Poor | ? |

Author: > It is not strict contradiction. Not widely used doesn't mean it doesn't have some adoptions. I guess point of adding this is indicate process of adoption outside of /lib which may eventually make it widely used.

This point has the wrong delivery message. The nixdoc-format is an established convention in /lib, but outside of that, nixdoc-format (if we call it like that) has only some rare adoptions. 

Maybe this point should just be:
- (+)  It Is already quite established in /lib.

> | Indentation | Clear | like Nix's multiline strings, thus **Intuitive** | Poor | ? |

Author: > Why Javadoc have poor indentation? It also have left-side anchor like `##`

Hm right. cannot find he reason why I wrote that down. 
Should have the same property as the` ##` format then.

> | Indentation | Clear | like Nix's multiline strings, thus **Intuitive** | Poor | ? |

Reviewer 14: >     * (+)  It Is already quite established in /lib.

How is it different from first bullet point?

```markdown
- (+) Stays primarily compatible with the currently used comments in lib.
```

## Nixodc

Nixdoc needs to be changed in order to differentiate between regular comment and doc-comments.
There might be an intermediate phase of transition, where the old syntax and features is supported for a while.

- When extending nixdoc or writing dedicated parsers, the following persons can assist: [@hsjobeki]

## Documentation generators

Generating documentation from doc-comments is still a challenge.
If we'd like the fully automated approach, we definitely need something that can also evaluate nix expressions. 
(We have such a module in `tvix` which needs to be investigated more here)

Alternatively we can use the future nixdoc together with a static `map.json` that contains the scope for every discovery file/path in nixpkgs.

As this second approach is much easier I propose this is how we should initially start to extend the scope.

## More specialized section headings

### Type

- An RFC under construction specifies the used syntax within the `Type`-Block. It depends on this RFC, as it is the groundwork to provide a standardized field where additional rules can apply.

## Native support in nix

> - `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-comments so that our users don't have to rely on nixpkgs or external tools. Those tools can still exist and provide more custom functionality, but documenting nix expressions should be natively possible.

Reviewer 9: I am more minimalistic in this specific point.

First, because Nix is now a "bundled multitool", similar to busybox (where `cp == busybox cp`, `mount == busybox mount` etc.). 

What "implement native support" means here? There should be a `nix doc export fancyFile.pdf`? Or `nix repl` should have a special `showDocs` function to read docblocks?

Second, what if I want to use it in a constrained cloud à la GitHub Actions? Can I compile nix without doc support?

Author: Should I delete this point? I don't want to specify what "native support" means. I thought of something like the "nix repl doc" feature from the PR I mentioned earlier. Or, more generally, doc support in the native Nix tooling you get if you installed just nix: that could mean either previewing rendered documentation in some way or retrieving doc-comments from specific items. (Without the need to install any extra tools)

Reviewer 9: I believe RFCs should be focused on only one thing. It helps focusing on the problem to be solved.

Defining a format (grammar, semantics etc.) of in-code documentation is one thing.

Defining if we should modify the nix evaluator to parse this in-code documentation is another thing.

## Documentation generators

- Future nixdoc could have a static `map.json` that contains the scope for every discovery file/path in nixpkgs.

> As this second approach is much easier, we propose that we initially start to extend the scope.

Author: I clarified that. 

So there are either 
(1) static 
(2) dynamic 
nix doc tools

Dynamic tools include the evaluation of expressions. While static tools only look at the AST and static configuration files.

Generating static documentation from doc-comments would still be excellent but remains a challenge if generated from Nix dynamically.
If we want the fully automated approach, we need something to evaluate nix expressions. 

> We solve such concerns in `tvix` or in `nix`, which could provide a `nix-analyzer` that pre-evaluates expressions and their respective documentation. 

Reviewer 14: `tvix` is not self-describing name and there are no more mentions of it in this doc. Same goes with `nix-analyzer`. I'm not sure I understand this sentence correctly, but maybe something like:

```suggestion
We solve such concerns in [`tvix`](https://github.com/tvlfyi/tvix) or in `nix`, which could vend a tool that pre-evaluates expressions and gathers their respective documentation. 
```

P.S. I tried to search for `nix-analyzer` and found only empty crate https://crates.io/crates/nix-analyzer

Reviewer 13: The link is just an export for GitHub, https://tvix.dev/ is the website.

Author: @ony: Thanks, you caught a blind spot here. 

- One might not know tvix (see @flokli's link) 

- with `nix-analyzer`, I initially meant a fictional tool that we could build similar to `rust-analyzer`. It does not exist yet.

I updated the sentence

## Type

- An RFC under construction specifies the used Syntax within the `# Type` Heading.
- The `type` feature should belong in the nix syntax. Try them within the comments first; This is still possible.

- see a [preview](https://typednix.dev) of an eventual future doc-type-syntax.

## Native support in Nix

> - `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-comments so that our users do not have to rely on nixpkgs or external tools. Those tools can still exist and provide more custom functionality, but documenting nix expressions should be natively possible.

Reviewer 14: I suspect something else meant under word "native".

What does "native" support and "documenting natively" means?  
Is it that Nix should allow to introspecting doc-comments right in Nix expressions themselves?

It also worth to relate this with some goal of this RFC.

E.g. if it is about not having `nix` and `nix-doc` in separate packages, then I don't think it is much useful for this RFC 🙂

Author: As this is in the "Future work" section, this was meant to show a future possibility.

> If it is about not having nix and nix-doc in separate packages ... 

Yes. It is about having a "nixdoc" like functionality directly in nix. (not separate packages, if you will)

How would you re-write this sentence to make that more clear?

Reviewer 14: With mention of "Future work", I think I understood you now. It is about how we can leverage results of this RFC which is indeed useful for its adoption. From that I only can think of:

```markdown
- `nix repl` could fallback to use doc-comments for output of `:doc`.
- `nix repl` could enrich `:t` (describing result of evaluation) to include type signature.
  E.g. instead of plain "a function" could say "a function of Any -> integer".
- `nix --show-trace` can be extended to include type information in output when available.
- `nix` could be extended with `--check-types` option to print warnings/errors when from doc-comments 
  it is known that types do not match either for documented expression or on the boundaries of calls like
  when passing in function.
```

I can see why "nixdoc" (I'm not familiar with it yet) might be useful in `nix repl`. But I do not see at the moment why it is important to have it in a same package and I do not see concerns with using "external" tools. E.g.
What us impact on this RFC we will have by not following that?  
What impact this RFC have on decision to follow that suggestion?

Note that if it is about ensuring we have coherent parsing in `nix` and in tools around generating documentation - it can be solved by having AST parser vended from Nix or have it in a separate package consumed by all tools including LSP.

Author: Thanks for your pretty detailed response.

I think I won't go into that much detail in this section. That all is what I meant with the term "native support"

> Ensuring we have coherent parsing in Nix

That'd be nice but it's not the target of this RFC.

Also, the whole point is not about moving any "package" into one another or something. Just that nix could natively implement (same or more)  functionality that we currently have by calling out to nixdoc

| Changes the existing code by | Minor | Minor |
| Needs vertical space  | Recommended | No |
| Visual distinction from comments | Low | High |
| Markdown compatibility | Best | None |

**Proposed headings:**

Use markdown headings `# <Heading>`. This allows best compatibility with the already specified markdown/commonmark format. Allowing for easy and intuitive usage for comments.

## Consequences to not implementing this

- By not implementing this feature, nix gains no ability for tool-generated documentation.
- Documentation will be defined by nixdoc, not by the nix community itself.
- Many existing comments written for documentation will remain un-discoverable.

## Examples

This section contains examples for the different formats to visualize them and emphasize the previously discussed characteristics.

### `##` inspired from rust's `///` 

with `Markdown` Headings

`somefile.nix`

```nix
    ## <Description or Tagline>
    ## 
    ## # Example
    ##
    ## <Comprehensive code>
    ## 
    ## # Type
    ##    
    ## <Type Signature>
    mapAttrs = f: s: #...
```

### `/** */` inspired by the current multiline strings 

With `@{keyword}:` Headings

```nix
    /** 

>         <Description or Tagline>

Reviewer 9: I believe it should follow the CommonMark spec, as you suggested on the previous heading.
It makes the things more consistent.

---
feature: doc-comment-standard
start-date: 2023-03-27
author: hsjobeki
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Propose a standard format for Doc-comments.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The following are the envisioned goals

- be able to generate documentation from code for any nix expression.
- be able to distinguish between documentation-relevant comments and unrelated comments.
- make doc comments easy to write and read
- be able to parse and render doc comments nicely
- standardize a format for doc comments that can be extended by further RFCs

This RFC is a significant change to the existing documentation convention
but allows to distinguish between regular comments and doc comments. This is important because arbitrary code comments should not end up in generated documentation.

> > Hint: Generating static documentation is controvert topic in nixpkgs. It was found that is impossible to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve evaluation of expressions in some way. This already goes deeply into implementation details and is thus not further discussed in this document. Although we envision solutions to solve this issue.

Author: > - it's controversial
> - it was found that it's impossible to generate accurate documentation statically.

I should re-phrase the second sentence (impossible) is quite impossible to prove because there might be a way that is just not found yet. 

References that static generation may be controversial; I don't know if there is a single only source to convince sb.
Also, past the recent comments, I got the feeling that @gilice, @AndersonTorres, and I had a contrary discussion about it.

- Stalled PR Implementation in the repl for doc-comments from @roberth: https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652
- Stalled PR Implementation from @edolstra: https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5527
- Users asking how to obtain documentation from their code: [discourse thread](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/how-to-generate-documentation-from-arbitrary-nix-code/22292)
- [Any consensus on documentation generation tool for nixpkgs manual?](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/any-consensus-on-documentation-generation-tool-for-nixpkgs-manual/15550)

> > Hint: Generating static documentation is controvert topic in nixpkgs. It was found that is impossible to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve evaluation of expressions in some way. This already goes deeply into implementation details and is thus not further discussed in this document. Although we envision solutions to solve this issue.

Reviewer 7: Then this context should be added to the RFC, if you want to keep that sentence in. Otherwise it's a claim without data backing it.

### Unspecified format

In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not specified**.

The *nixdoc*-tool enforces a somewhat consistent format but the actual format was never specified and is not enforced in parts of nixpkgs where nixdoc is currently not applied.

Extending the scope of *nixdoc* is not the primary goal. Instead, we should find formal rules for writing *doc-comments*. Tools like *nixdoc* can then implement against this RFC instead of the format relying on nixdoc implementation details.

### Only specific placements work

The placement of those comments requires precisely commenting at the attribute set containing the function declarations, which is not usable for general-purpose documentation strings.

e.g.,

- file that directly exports the lib-function without wrapping it in an attribute set.
- file that exports a constant expression
- files outside of lib cannot be rendered due to missing conventions

### Differentiate from regular comments

> The format doesn't allow any distinction between doc-comments or regular comments.

Author: So with nixdoc, it is impossible to differentiate a regular multiline comment from a doc-comment. Until you really have `Example:` and/or `Type:`. But as both fields are optional, doc-comments cannot be distinguished without them. Right?

- more...

#### frameworks

- [dream2nix/utils](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/utils/config.nix)
- [dream2nix/templates/builder](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/templates/builders/default.nix)
- more... 

#### Other tools

Other tools that work directly with the nix AST and comments:

- [noogle](https://noogle.dev) - Nix API search engine. It allows to search functions and other expressions.
- [nix-doc](https://github.com/lf-/nix-doc) - A Nix developer tool leveraging the rnix Nix parser for intelligent documentation search and tags generation
- [manix](https://github.com/mlvzk/manix) - A fast CLI documentation searcher for nix.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

**Proposed Solution:**

Each line of a doc-comment starts with `##`.

The content of all doc-comments is rendered using markdown.
Following the [commonmark-specification](https://spec.commonmark.org/)

## Doc-comments

The following exampple demonstrates the concrete usage scenario.

### A doc-comment referencing the subsequent expression

`somefile.nix`

```nix
{

>   ## <Description or Tagline>

Author: removed it

- How can a tool keep the connection from where a docstring was defined and where the attribute was exposed (lib/default. nix exposes mapAttrs which is defined at lib/attrsets.nix)
  - There are more complicated things.

-> Answer: A Tool might be able to keep track of a percentage of expressions, and sometimes it may be very hard or impossible. For that case, the doc-comment can offer a dedicated Keyword to override the scope.

e.g.

The following is an idea for a problem that will arise if tools try to track doc-comments' positions and the location in the nixpkgs tree. (Although this problem is not nixpkgs specific)

```nix
## This file is called somewhere that cannot be automatically tracked/is impossible to analyze statically.
## The 'TreePath' override can be used by the docstring author to set fixed paths in the nixpkgs expression.
## This tells the doc-tool that the expression is available in two aliases: `pkgs.stdenv` and `lib.sth` 
## (This behavior will not be specified in this RFC)
## # Meta
## ## TreePath
## - pkgs.stdenv
## - lib.sth

{...}:
{
    # returns something
}
```

# Future work
[future]: #future-work

## Editor support

> When starting hitting {enter} inside a doc-block the new line, should be automatically prefixed with `##` accordingly.

Reviewer 9: Is this somehow standardized?

Author: Couldnt find how rust lsp is doing it. But yes there should be some code action or something in the lsp world. Do you know how it works? It must be nested in some capability of the lsp

Author: Some research revealed:
- The lsp feature for the rust-language: https://github.com/rust-lang/vscode-rust/pull/156 
- Issue for vscode to implement that natively: https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/26694

Reviewer 9: In other words, LSP standard does not tell a thing about mandatory keystrokes for inserting programming constructs.
Phew!

##### References 

###### nixpkgs - Dosctrings examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)
- more...

###### frameworks

- [dream2nix/utils](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/utils/config.nix)
- [dream2nix/templates/builder](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/templates/builders/default.nix)
- more... 

###### Other tools

Other tools that work directly with the nix AST and comments:

- [noogle](https://noogle.dev) - Nix API search engine. It allows you to search functions and other expressions.
- [nix-doc](https://github.com/lf-/nix-doc) - A Nix developer tool leveraging the rnix Nix parser for intelligent documentation search and tags generation
- [manix](https://github.com/mlvzk/manix) - A fast CLI documentation searcher for nix. 

> ## Proposed Improvement - Doc-blocks

Reviewer 4: The sections in this RFC are very confusing. You had a "Drawbacks" section earlier, but it's about drawbacks to the pre-RFC state. I'd rather call that "Current problems" or so.

And here you're talking about a proposed improvement, but we're still in the overall "Motivation" section. The actual proposal should be in the "Detailed design" section instead.

You also have an "Alternatives" section that comes before the "Detailed design" section, that's backwards.

All of this makes the RFC rather hard to read and understand.

Author: The reason i went with the alternatives section first is because i wanted to open the discussion about the different possibles outcomes first. Before proposing my personal favorite.

Do you think this makes sense?

Author: I switched the sections back to the order in the template. You are right; it is confusing that way.

}
```

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

In general, we need the following:

1. General format for doc-strings.
2. Format for headings and the allowed content.

> It would be nice if this could be close to the markdown format.
> Markdown is the most straightforward and most accepted format 
> for writing and rendering documentation.

#### Find a suitable decision in - the following matrix

| General / Section | 0 `##` | 1 `/** */`   | 2 `other`   |
|---|---|---|---|
| 0 `# {Keyword}` | `## # Example` | `/** # Example */` |  `?` |
| 1 `@{Keyword}:`  | `# @Example:` |`/** @Example: */` | `?` |
| 2 `other`  | `?` | `?` | `?` |

It is also possible to not implement this RFC:

- By not implementing this feature, nix loses the ability for tool-generated documentation.
- Documentation within code will remain unstable / only determined by nixdoc.

## The different formats considered

### `##` inspired from rust's `///` 

with `Markdown` Headings

Example:

```nix
# somefile.nix

    ## <Description or Tagline>
    ## 
    ## # Example
    ##
    ## <Comprehensive code>
    ## 
    ## # Type
    ##    
    ## <Type Signature>
    mapAttrs = f: s: #...
```

| Pro | Con |

> |---|---|

Reviewer 4: These pro/cons are a bit hard to read. I instead recommend having a larger table with different approaches horizontally and their properties vertically, like this:

| Property/Approach | `##` | `/** */` | Javadoc | ... | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | 
| Needs termination | No | Yes | Yes ||
| Indentation clarity | Good | Poor | Poor ||
| ... | | | |

And before the table you can describe each approach and property in more detail.

Author: Yes! Good idea. :+1: I'll write it that way.

| Follows more closely the current convention |  |
| Needs less vertical space | |
| doesn't need newlines; everything could be even within a single line, allowing compression (may not be needed ?) | |

## Alternative approach - just comments

There is the idea from python that doc-strings are just strings, not even special ones. Comments will be docstrings if they follow specific placement rules. However, we thought this was a bad idea to follow. Such complex placement rules require the users to understand where those places are; with nix syntax, this is slightly more complex than with python. Because we don't have keywords such as `class MyClass():` or `def function():` where placement would be obvious

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Proposed Solution (0,0) => `##` For docstring body and markdown headings `# H1`

The following abstract rules describe how to write doc-strings.

> I would be pleased if you comment about whether we should use `## {content}` or `/** {content} */`
> I did write this RFC tailored towards `##` but using `/** */` is still an open discussion.

### Format Rules (When choosing (0,0) )

> - [F100] - doc-string are all comments. That start with `##` or `#|` e.g. `## {content}`

Reviewer 4: I'm confused by these (0, 0) and [F100] strings here, the meaning of these isn't explained anywhere.

Reviewer 9: To me it looks like "I have no time to cleanup this copy-paste".

Author: > I'm confused by these (0, 0) and [F100] strings here, the meaning of these isn't explained anywhere.

Propably schould remove these. They dont make sense i think.

Author: @AndersonTorres please provide constructive feedback.

     constructs a function that always returns a static value.

     Type: const :: a -> b -> a
     Example:
       let f = const 5; in f 10
       => 5
  */
  const =
    # Value to return
    x:
    # Value to ignore
    y: x;
```

## Current problems

### Multiplicity of formats

Within nixpkgs alone, several conventions for doc-comments have emerged, see [1], [2] and [3].

Notably, most doc-comments utilize some fraction of the of CommonMark syntax, even if they are not meant to be rendered.

[1]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders/default.nix
[2]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix
[3]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix

In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not formally specified**.

Among the formats encountered in the wild, the one used in `nixpkgs/lib` is the only one intended to be rendered as part of an API documentation, via the nixdoc third-party tool, whose syntax has not been standardized.

### Impossible to differentiate from internal comments

> The lack of a formal definition of a doc-comment also means there is no reliable way to distinguish them from internal comments, which makes it impossible to access from doc-comments from tooling. Futhermore it makes it very hard to generate accurate and complete reference documentation.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
The lack of a formal definition of a doc-comment also means there is no reliable way to distinguish them from internal comments, which makes it impossible to access from doc-comments from tooling. Furthermore it makes it very hard to generate accurate and complete reference documentation.
```

## Placement

**The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the documentable node.**

A **documentable node** can be:

- Expression 
- Binding 
- Lambda Formal

The following rules apply in descending order of precedence:

- Doc-comments are placed before the **documentable node**. Only whitespace or non-doc comments are allowed in between. ([Examples](#basic-examples)) 

- The documentation present before the `attribute path` describes the body of the attribute. ([Examples](#Attributes))
    - In case placement is ambiguous, the one closer to the body has higher precedence. ([Examples](#ambiguous-placement))

### Examples

#### Basic examples

Only whitespaces between the `documentable node` and the `doc-comment`

```nix
/**Doc for anonymous lambda function*/
↓
x: x;
```

```nix
listToAttrs [
  { name = "foo"; value = /**Documentation for '1'*/1; }
]
```

#### Attributes 

It is allowed to write the documentation before the attribute instead of placing it right before the body.

```nix
/**Doc for lambda function bound to a variable*/
           ↓
assigned = x: x;
```

```nix
{

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Author: Agreed, the  "only" thing we need is proper position tracking for some kind of values and expressions, in a very simplified model. Possible implementation could be to have it behind a cli-flag if it has major performance impacts. Generating documentation would be less performant, but at least beeing automated. We still have to explore the space of possible implementations to find the best one.

> If we'd want to support something like that, we'd need to make every attribute set expression essentially create a copy of every value.

Note that we didn't specify that values are documentable. The relation between expression and value is not very clear in some cases.

```nix
{
  /**This will show up */
                  ↓
  myFun = import ./my-fun.nix;

# The expression is:  ' import ./my-fun.nix; '
```

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Reviewer 11: > One problem with this approach is that it won't work for pure renames/aliases, e.g.

Also other optimizations, like beta-reduction-under-lambda and constant propagation.

> have it behind a cli-flag if it has major performance impacts.

It certainly will; it impedes a lot of optimizations.  Many of these are optimizations that cppnix doesn't/can't/won't implement, but other implementations will.  So the measurement of "performance impacts" can't be cppnix-specific.

I also think the cli-flag should inhibit the creation of derivations.  I cannot imagine any legitimate need for derivations to be influenced by docstrings.  This ensures that we can always disable docstring-reflection in the performance-sensitive builds without changing the outcome.

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Reviewer 17: > Note that we didn't specify that values are documentable.

That is a problem for dynamic documentation. There is only ever one expression, the top level expression (which won't be documented since it is user-supplied), when evaluating. Everything else will only be given as a value.

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Reviewer 8: > There is only ever one expression, the top level expression (which won't be documented since it is user-supplied), when evaluating.

I think we might have some misunderstanding on expressions.

"Expressions" are "eval"-able language constructs. For example, 

These things are expressions:

`1`
`1 1 1 1`  (This is a lambda "apply", (Call 1 (Arg 1 1 1))

But these things are not:

`...` -- ellipsis, part of lambda formal
`a = ` -- symbol, and the `=` in attrset

> There is only ever one expression

Hmm, I think we do have some nested expressions while eval?

e.g.

```nix
{ }: sub-expr
# ~~~~~~~~~ lambda
```

> That is a problem for dynamic documentation

Sorry, could you please elaborate what is "dynamic documentation"?

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Reviewer 17: I know what an expression is. You are missing some context: During discussion, implementability was a big point of discussion. Specifically the following ways of using the doc comments were discussed, also w.r.t. parity between them:

* Static doc generation, i.e. what nixdoc does right now
* Dynamically accessing doc comments, e.g. from REPL via the `:doc` command or from an evaluation via `builtins.unsafeGetDocComment` or similar.

The problem being, of course, that while during static doc extraction we are actually dealing with expressions, during evaluation there only ever is values. How these relate to the doc comments next to expressions is an important question to solve.

> Hmm, I think we do have some nested expressions while eval?

Of course, but `:doc lib.map` has one top level expression it recursively reduces to a Value—what doc comment next to which expression should be used? In that case you can come up with a cheap solution, of course, but values can arbitrarily be passed around, rebound and manipulated. Already `lib` is non-trivial, since `lib.map` and `lib.lists.map` are “the same”, albeit not equal, and can have differing doc comments next to the expression that “constitutes” them in each case.

I'm a bit confused that dynamic documentation is construed as a non-issue of RFC 145 at this point, as I remember it was one of the primary motivations of @hsjobeki's to undertake it in the first place. He was (is?) of the opinion that only dynamically introspecting `lib` using an algorithm written in Nix and extracting the attached documentation could lead to correct generated docs. In fact, he is already [using this approach for `docnix`](https://github.com/nix-community/docnix/blob/7aa0d59959f300815e8c10d71078fac65e548587/code-docs/mkDocs.nix) via a customized Nix implementation.

It is of course valid to only prescribe syntax for doc comments, but this should be made very explicit and incurs the consequence that it is more or less arbitrary what doc comment documents what “thing”. The potential future problem we are buying is that we can't replicate the same documentation output on the REPL dynamically, that we are generating statically for the nixpkgs manual, for example.

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Author: Valid point. I am using dynamic documentation generation. This means I evaluate the nix expression tree of e.g. `.lib`
Then find all the lambdas and all doc-comments of them.
One of the biggest challenges is finding documentation for partially applied functions and their aliases. 
When I utilize the current lambda position tracking (with my custom nix version) and the already existent `unsafeGetAttrPos` I think we can build highly accurate documentation. 

With the RFC in its current state, I am very optimistic, the scope is very narrow, to just having the format and placement changed/adapted.

I think from the current state i or we could build a tool that serves as a genreic documentation renderer / extractor for nix projects.

A native implementation in the evaluator is currently moved out of scope. 

Of the RFCs scope: We should maybe move `unsafeGetAttrPos` behind a CLI flag and also add `unsafeGetLambdaPos` such that i don't have to maintain a separate fork of nix.

>     /**This documents the specialisation `map (x: x)` */

Reviewer 17: > This means I evaluate the nix expression tree of e.g. `.lib`

Which is of course only ever given in value form.

> We should maybe move unsafeGetAttrPos behind a CLI flag

Probably hard to do, as it is required for nixpkgs' `meta` sets. We could probably drop it if `pkgs/by-name` is adopted more, but it is kind of essential so that `nix edit` can work.

          ↓
    foo = map (x: x);          
}
```

### Attribute path

```nix
{
  /** Doc 1 bound to 'c' */
      ↓   ↓
  a.b.c = 1;
}

# Documents only the expression bound to 'c'. NOT the attribute set bound to 'a' or 'b'.
```

#### Ambiguous placement

```nix
/**Doc B*/

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Author: > I would make documentability of normal values at least optional

I was playing with a thought of proposing something like 'rfc145 maturity level' for the implementation path.
features that we need right away and features that are more optional or harder to implement.  But at the same time, i tried to keep implementation details out here.

**Idea**:

## Doc-comment maturity level

1. Doc-comment tracking for lambdas 
2. Doc-comment tracking for bindings 
3. Doc-comment tracking for lambda formals
4. Doc-comment tracking for expressions

@sternenseemann do you think we should add something like this to the RFC?

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Author: >  I'd also expect that there will be a lot of edge cases and static extraction won't always agree with dynamic extraction

I can confirm that. But in my POC dynamic extraction is relatively stable. 
https://nix-community.github.io/docnix/reference/#overview

Note: It doesn't show all documentation right now because of some limitations, but I'm optimistic that we can resolve those.

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Reviewer 4: > I would make documentability of normal values at least optional.

Reminder that we don't have to confirm that RFCs are 100% doable. PoC's are good, but part of the reason for the RFC is to first get agreement on an idea before spending too much time implementing it, which generally means you're gonna miss some aspects, and that's fine.

This also applies to https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/145#discussion_r1397514750

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Reviewer 8: I think that we are talking about the position of doc-comments and the nodes which they are describing for. Not values.

I mean

```
/** foo */ 1
```

This is documenting the node `1` (has position/offset in thie source file, a language construct), not the value `1` (which can be shared among different expressions). 

For language tooling I think we should not explicitly forbid this position. For example if the user want to query information on the position, we can give the doc-comment `foo`.

> The placement describes the relationship between doc-comments and the documentable node

This RFC made it very clear that, it is describing "nodes", not values.

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Reviewer 17: > This RFC made it very clear that, it is describing "nodes", not values.

Node is a non-term, presumably borrowed from rnix-parser's internal terminology.

It should be made explicit that this RFC prescribes syntax for documenting expressions and explicitly proposes no relationship of doc comments to values. The thing is, of course, that values is pretty much all we deal with all the time.

> int = /**Doc A*/1;

Author: This RFC now states:
>  ...
>  A documentable node can be:
> 
>  Expression
>  Binding
>  Lambda Formal

Its not values, and not "nodes" since that is very vague

If you have better suggestions, i am open to it.

I think the RFC should be very clear now, also providing extensive examples.

- (-) Strictly binding doc comments content to commonMark might restrict users.
    - (+) Users/Tools can still use regular comments or develop alternative solutions.
- (-) CommonMark does not specify the current rich features from nixdoc, such as predefined sections and structures that could be used as a source for automated toolings. Such as types for type-checking or examples to run automated-tests
    - (+) Future tools can still build their conventions on top of this RFC. They might not directly specify them in an RFC but be a tool developers choose for a specific codebase. However, we have yet to get that tools. So it is good when rich features remain unspecified.
  
</details>

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Changes the existing comments inside the code base

This could be (partially) automated. (see our [codemod](https://github.com/nix-community/docnix/tree/3c0531cb5b4c9f3e9069b73d19e6c4be8508d905/codemod) )

Also, the migration could be performed piecemal, starting perhaps with `nixpkgs.lib`.

See future work.

## Breaking the nixpkgs manual

> This is a breaking change, to the current nixpkgs manual tooling Nixpkgs library function documentation.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
This is a breaking change, to the current Nixpkgs manual tooling and Nixpkgs library function documentation.
```

See future work.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

## All considered outer formats

| Property / Approach | `##` | `/** */` | `Javadoc` | `/*\|` or `/*^`  | All comments are doc-comments |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

> | Inspired by | Rust | Current nixpkgs.lib | C++/Java/Javascript | Haskell Haddock | Current nixpkgs.lib |

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
| Inspired by | Rust | Current nixpkgs.lib | C++/Java/JavaScript | Haskell Haddock | Current nixpkgs.lib |
```

| Changes the existing code by | Much | Less | Even More | Less | ? |
| Needs Termination | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | ? |
| Indentation | Clear | like Nix's multiline strings, thus **Intuitive** | Clear | ? | ? |
| Needs vertical space  | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | ? |
| Visual distinction from comments | High | Low | Medium | Medium | No distinction at all |
| Needs Autocompletion (Language Server) to continue the next line. | Yes | No | Yes | No | ? |
| Punctuation Variations / Amount of different special characters | 1 (Less) | 2 (Medium) | 2 (Medium) | 3 (More) | None |
| Markdown compatibility (also depends on indentation clarity) | **Visual conflicts with headings `# Title`** | Good | Medium | Good | Only with multiline comments |
| breaks when interrupted with newlines | Yes | No | ? | No | |
| Simplicity (Brainload) | Medium | Simple | Complex | More Complex | |

### Refactoring note

**Observing**: From a refactoring perspective, it might also be interesting to see how many conflicts the different formats would cause.

Nixpkgs comments:

- `##` ~4k usages
- `#` ~20k usages
- `/*` ~6k usages

> - `/**` 160 usages 

Author: If this was unclear, it is what we expect to be a non-doc-comment only ``/***/` would be a doc-comment although it is empty.

> - `/**` 160 usages 

Reviewer 8: > This could be solved by prescribing the doc comment parser to somehow reject these kind of /**/ comments somehow.

Isn't `/**/` just a normal block(multi-line) comment in this case? I think doc-comment should be `\/\*\*([^*]|\*+[^*/])*\*+\/`, that is, it should at least consume `/**` and then ends with `*/`, without overlapping `*`. IMHO, this is very easy to impl in lexers.

> - `/**` 160 usages 

Reviewer 17: Granted, I just wanted to mention it, as `/**/` accounts for a significant amount of the occurrences of `/**` in nixpkgs, so needs to be kept in mind for this list.

> - `/**` 160 usages 

Author: Just counted the occurrences of `/**/` as comments:
35 all of them are used for "alignments" like this:

```nix
  foo =
    /**/ if condition1 then expr
    else if condition2 then alternative
    else throw "error";
```

Since we don't consider them doc-comments, they should be ignored anyways. Although i think it makes sense to keep an overview, that it might have contributed to our decision to use `/** */`

  pred:
  # The attribute set to filter
  set:
  listToAttrs (concatMap (name: let v = set.${name}; in if pred name v then [(nameValuePair name v)] else []) (attrNames set));
````

->

`lib/attrsets.nix (new format)`
````nix
/**
  Filter an attribute set by removing all attributes for which the
  given predicate return false.

  # Example

  ```nix
  filterAttrs (n: v: n == "foo") { foo = 1; bar = 2; }
  => { foo = 1; }
  ```

  # Type

  ```
  filterAttrs :: (String -> Any -> Bool) -> AttrSet -> AttrSet
  ```

  # Arguments

  - [pred] Predicate taking an attribute name and an attribute value, which returns `true` to include the attribute, or `false` to exclude the attribute.
  - [set] The attribute set to filter
*/
filterAttrs =
  pred:
  set:
  listToAttrs (concatMap (name: let v = set.${name}; in if pred name v then [(nameValuePair name v)] else []) (attrNames set));
````

## Tooling

All current rendering tooling solutions should support displaying the specified doc-comment format.

Currently at least:

### nixpkgs Manual renderer

The current nixpkgs manual needs to be adopted to this change.

> We expect changes in the following to be neccessary:

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
We expect changes in the following to be necessary:
```

- [nixos_render_docs](https://github.com/NixOS/Nixpkgs/tree/e4082efedb483eb0478c3f014fa851449bca43f9/pkgs/tools/nix/nixos-render-docs/src) 
- [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc)

## Native support in Nix

- `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-comments.

Primarily because the *Nix* language requires access to the actual evaluator for building correct relations between doc-comment and the node they document.

> > Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of the scope of this RFC.

Author: > This is risky to a degree.

You cannot plan everything right? I think it is okay if there are limitations to the implementation. Although they could be resolved over time.

> > Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of the scope of this RFC.

Reviewer 11: > You cannot plan everything right? I think it is okay if there are limitations to the implementation. Although they could be resolved over time.

@hsjobeki you keep saying "the implementation" when talking about the Nix language's grammar and semantics.  This is not what most people mean when they say "the implementation".

> > Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of the scope of this RFC.

Author: > you keep saying "the implementation" when talking about the Nix language's grammar and semantics.

I think we misunderstand each other.

By implementation i mean any tool or feature that implements against this RFC. 

Afaik we don't change any grammar or semantics of the language. 

There might be changes in one of the implementations of the language. Being the lexer of c++ nix because this implementation of the language doesn't keep comments in the ast. But that is an internal design question of c++ nix.
Tvix doesn't have this problem because they use rnix, which keeps trivial tokens in the ast.

Big problem is because nix doesn't have a language specification any change in the c++ lexer or parser directly affects a potential language specification because the current source of the language is only our holy reference implementation.

I am trying to find a compromise between:

- removing the whole "nix should implement this" point
- nix should implement against this rfc in the future, but we cannot specify how and when.

Do you have any suggestions, that resolve our problem?

> > Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of the scope of this RFC.

Author: Just removed the statement. I'll mark this as resolved.

> ## Native support in Nix
> 
> - `NixOS/nix` should implement native support for doc-comments.
> 
> Primarily because the *Nix* language requires access to the actual evaluator for building correct relations between doc-comment and the node they document.
> 
> > Note: We considered implementation details, but specifying those is out of the scope of this RFC.
> 
> Related POCs:
> 
> - https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/9054
> - https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652
> - https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5527
> - https://github.com/NixOS/nix/commit/8e252320f52426c734883709eb398d2161c3fe82
> 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
```

This needs its own RFC.  What is currently in this RFC is nowhere near well-described enough to "count" as an RFC, and an RFC can't delegate the RFC process' authority to bring ["new features into the Nix language"](https://github.com/hsjobeki/rfcs/blob/2987912e0f33b73b37250817953bf62fd5594a25/rfcs/0001-rfc-process.md?plain=1#L12C57-L13C63).

I have no other objections to this RFC, but slipping in this "oh yeah and we will expose this to the evaluator" without any details really doesn't fly with me.  My main criterion there is ensuring that this feature can be turned off, *and is in fact turned off* in any evaluation session which creates derivations.  As the RFC now stands I can't tell if that's the case.

Reviewer 4: This is only in the future work section, it's not part of the RFC's design

Reviewer 11: Then there should be no problem removing it.

I don't see the point of putting something that isn't part of an RFC in the RFC.

Reviewer 8: +1 for removing.

Author: Ok Agreed. I'll remove this statement.

This RFC is a significant change to the existing documentation convention
but allows to distinguish between regular comments and doc comments. This is important because arbitrary code comments should not end up in generated documentation.

> Hint: Generating static documentation is controvert topic in nixpkgs. It was found that is impossible to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve evaluation of expressions in some way. This already goes deeply into implementation details and is thus not further discussed in this document. Although we envision solutions to solve this issue.

## Current State

We currently utilize a `doc-comment`-like functionality to build a subset of static documentation for nix functions. (e.g., nixpkgs.lib documentation via: [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc))
Many inconsistently written comments document specific parts of nixpkgs and other nix-frameworks (see [references-to-this](#references-to-the-problems-above)).

We use some of them to generate documentation automatically. (e.g., nixpkgs/lib via [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc) )

> This solution requires a lot of manual work; more specifically, *nixdoc* is a custom tool that works only for that purpose.

Author: I have removed this phrase. It disturbed me anyways that this RFC mentions nixdoc so often. It's just a tool, after all.

---
feature: doc-comment-standard
start-date: 2023-03-27
author: hsjobeki
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (@DavHau; @sternenseemann; tbd.)

> shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)

Reviewer 18: I'd prefer @Lassulus to be the leader. @Lassulus would you be up for it?

> shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)

Reviewer 5: Yes I would be okay with that

related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Propose a standard format specification for Doc-comments.

This RFC includes two concerns that define a doc-comment:

- Outer format rules to allow distinction between regular comments and doc-comments
- Inner format rules that describe the required format of the content.

However, both concerns relate closely to each other; It makes sense and reduces bureaucracy to address that in a single RFC.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The following are the envisioned goals.

- Be able to generate documentation from code for any nix expression.
- Make doc comments easy to write and read
- Standardize a format for doc comments that further RFCs can extend

>   - E.g. extend with code examples that can be converted to tests (aka doctests).

Author: Maybe we should somehow clearify what: "Outer and Inner format" means?

Outer format:
- Generally, rules to build a relation between code (API) and the doc-comment. 
  - Placement rules.
  - Use an additional `*`

Inner rules:
- Generally, rules affecting the actual content of the comment
  - Use CommonMark.
  - Indent String formatting (`''  ''`)

This RFC is a significant change to existing documentation conventions.
It allows distinguishing between regular and doc comments. Having distinction is essential because arbitrary code comments should not end up in generated documentation.

> Note: Generating static documentation is a controversial topic in nixpkgs.[^1][^2][^3][^4] We found that it is very hard to generate accurate documentation statically. A correct solution would involve the evaluation of expressions in some way.

[^1]: [Unmerged PR: nix repl doc-comments](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/1652), 2017
[^2]: [Unmerged PR: doc-strings for functors](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5527), 2021
[^3]: [discourse: users asking how to obtain documentation](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/how-to-generate-documentation-from-arbitrary-nix-code/22292), 2022
[^4]: [discourse: aksing for consensus on documentation](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/any-consensus-on-documentation-generation-tool-for-nixpkgs-manual/15550), 2021

> 

Reviewer 7: I would add here:

```suggestion

# Non-goals

- Discuss in which tool doc-comments are parsed and rendered. This could be an external tool, or Nix, or something else entirely, but that's out of scope for this RFC.
- Providing a migration path for existing comments. This is expected to require some amount of manual work. See "Future work" section.
```

## Current State

Currently, Nix does not have doc comments. Over time there evolved certain conventions, but they were never formally specified.
Within this RFC, we want to clarify which convention we should use, harmonize and improve the format for doc-comments to achieve the envisioned goals.

We use a tool called [nixdoc](https://github.com/nix-community/nixdoc) to use a 'doc-comment'- like functionality, which allows us to build a subset of static documentation of the `nixpkgs.lib` functions.

The format of a doc-comment was, however, never specified. The nix community does not understand the rules required by `nixdoc`, which we believe is one of the reasons for its lack of adoption.

Here is an example of the format understood by *nixdoc*:

```nix
# nixpkgs/lib/attrsets.nix

{
  /* <Attr Description>
  
     Type:
     <Type signature>
     
     Example:
     <Comprehensive Code example>
  */
  Attr =
    # <Describe arg1>
    arg1:
    # <Describe arg2>
    arg2:
    
    # ... implementation
}
```

## Current problems

> ### Lack of having an agreed format
> 
> The Nix community interprets the outer format and content of doc-comments differently. Within nixpkgs, several conventions and patterns need to be harmonized. It seems every directory decides upon their own convention; Or doesn't follow any. We immediately observe one clear thing: Most of comments utilize some form of markdown, even if they are not rendered.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Multiplicity of formats

Within nixpkgs alone, several conventions for doc-comments have emerged, see [1], [2] and [3].

Notably, most doc-comments utilize some fraction of the of CommonMark syntax, even if they are not meant to be rendered.

[1]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders/default.nix
[2]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix
[3]: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix
```

> In general, the format for writing documentation strings is **not formally specified**.

Reviewer 7: Remove, already stated multiple times above and implied in the section title.

> The *nixdoc*-tool requires a somewhat consistent format, but the basic format was never specified and cannot be enforced in parts of nixpkgs where nixdoc is currently not applied.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Among the formats encountered in the wild, the one used in `nixpkgs/lib` is the only one intended to be rendered as part of an API documentation, via the nixdoc third-party tool, whose syntax has not been standardized.
```

> Extending the scope of *nixdoc* is not the primary goal. Instead, we should find formal rules for writing *doc-comments*. Tools like *nixdoc* can then implement against this RFC instead of the format relying on nixdoc implementation details.

Reviewer 7: This does not seem like it belongs to this section, maybe it belongs to a "non-goals" section instead.

> ### Impossible to differentiate from regular comments

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Impossible to differentiate from internal comments
```

> The format does not allow any distinction between doc comments and regular comments.
> 
> Having a distinction would allow us to build reliable and correct documentation

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The lack of a formal definition of a doc-comment also means there is no reliable way to distinguish them from internal comments, which would result in automatically-produced API documentation which includes the wrong type of comments.
```

### References to the problems above

> Note: That specific collection of links should show the amount of inconsistency within the Nix ecosystem, which is a target of this RFC.

#### nixpkgs - doc-comment examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)

#### Current tools

We collected some Tools that work directly with the nix AST and comments.
Those would benefit from a standardized doc-comment.

- [noogle](https://noogle.dev) - Nix API search engine. It allows searching functions and other expressions.
- [nix-doc](https://github.com/lf-/nix-doc) - A Nix developer tool leveraging the rnix Nix parser for intelligent documentation search and tags generation

> - [manix](https://github.com/mlvzk/manix) - A fast CLI documentation searcher for Nix.

Reviewer 7: I would remove this whole section. The examples from Nixpkgs have been inserted where relevant, the mention of other tools is of unclear significance here.

    - (-) Outside the ./lib directory, nixodc is not a convention.
- (-) Is not widely understood.
- (-) The format is specific, should be more generic, and follow established conventions. (e.g., Markdown, Doxygen, JSdoc, Haddock)
- (-) The format is too complex and needs a whole list of complex rules to describe the exact format and content rules; this can also be observed in many false-formatted comments that do not render correctly.
    - (-) The sections are implicitly continued.
    - (-) The predefined section headers/keywords are very close to natural language and may accidentally be used.
        - (-) Syntax to start new sections does not follow conventions (e.g., `Example:`) In contrast JSdoc defines `@Example`; Markdown `# Example`; Doxygen `@example`; Haskell-Haddock `>>>`
    - (-) The content is implicitly rendered differently depending on predefined rules. Those rules need to be understood/feel natural.
- (+) Some usages outside of /lib directory indicate the process of adoption.
- (-) Some multiline comments become doc-comments, but it is unclear which comments have such a property.
    
</details>

> ## `/**` to start a doc-comment

Reviewer 7: As discussed OOB: I'd shorten this and the following sections, and move them to somewhere else, where we gather the currently agreed-upon features of doc-comments, namely:

- inner format is CommonMark
- outer format is `/**`
- doc-comments go before assignment expression, not where lambdas are defined

Author: We still need to discuss the last point in the next shepherd meeting: static and dynamic implementations should have POCs where we're sure they work and can be extended in the future.

  }
````
=>
```markdown
# Title

Some foo bar

## Subtitle

Some more 

  indented 1

    indented 2

```

### NixOS Module documentation

> Note: NixOS Modules also can produce documentation from their interface declarations. However, this does not include a generic description and usage examples.

`myModule.nix`
````nix
/**
  This is a custom module.
  
  It configures a systemd service.
  
  # Examples
  
  Different use case scenarios
  how to use this module
*/
{config, ...}:
{
  config = f: s: f s;
}
````

### Anonymous function documentation

`function.nix`
````nix
/**
  This is an anonymous function implementation.
  
  It does not have a name yet. 
  Nevertheless, documentation can be right next to the implementation.
  
  The name gets assigned later.
*/
{a, b}:
{
  sum = a + b;
}
````

### Anonymous expression documentation

`exp.nix`
````nix
/**
  This is an anonymous string.
 
  It is the documentation for the "anonymous expression" use case.
  
  Although this example is relatively superficial, there might be use cases.
*/
"-p=libxml2/include/libxml2"
````

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Changes the existing comments inside the code base

> This could be automated. (e.g., via codemod)

Reviewer 7: Nice, but it seems to be [deprecated](https://github.com/facebookarchive/codemod)?
```suggestion
This could be automated.
```

> Also, this affects only the `lib` directory and a few other places currently used to build the documentation.

Reviewer 7: How feasible is it to come up with a count of files that would need to be touched in Nixpkgs?

> Also, this affects only the `lib` directory and a few other places currently used to build the documentation.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Also, the migration could be performed piecemal, starting perhaps with `nixpkgs.lib`, as it is already parsed by a tool (nixdoc), which could be modified for the new standard.
```

> ## Changes in the `nixdoc` tooling are required
> 
> It remains an open question that needs to be tried;
> 
> Can we still build the current Nixos manuals with the new standard?
> 
> - We can wait to change everything.
> - Migration can happen in small steps.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
## Requires changes in existing tooling to produce documentation

nixdoc, the tool used to produce Nixpkgs library function documentation, would have to be modified to fit the new format.

This would be a small change, and anyway this RFC is agnostic to the tool used -- an entirely new tool could be developed, or the functionality be included as part of Nix.
```

### Refactoring note

**Observing**: From a refactoring perspective, it might also be interesting to see how many conflicts the different formats would cause.

nixpkgs comments:

- `##` ~4k usages (most of them for visual separation, e.g., `###########`)
- `#` ~20k usages
- `/*` ~6k usages
- `/**` 160 usages (most empty ?)

Choosing `/**` or subsets would cause minor conflicts within current nixpkgs. While this is NOT the main reason for the final decision, it MUST be considered.

## Just free text as a content format

While this allows the most freedom, it is usually considered the best option, not creating any restrictions.

However, [RFC72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md) defines commonMark as the official documentation format.
This is why we decided to follow this convention.

## Consequences of not implementing this

- By not implementing this feature, Nix gains no ability for tool-generated documentation.
- Documentation will be defined by nixdoc, not by the nix community.
- Many existing comments written for documentation will remain imperceptible.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

> - Will `nix` itself implement native support like in rust -> `cargo doc`?

Reviewer 7: This is already in "Future work", and I would add it to a non-goals section.

# Future work
[Future]: #future-work

## Migrate the existing comments

> Reformating existing doc-comments but also filtering out those who are not part of a documentation. e.g., Whether they are just empty or contain irrelevant information.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Reformatting existing doc-comments in Nixpkgs, but also filtering out false-positives, i.e. those that should not be part of the API documentation.
```

| Visual distinction from comments | High | Low | Medium | Medium |
| Needs Autocompletion (Language Server) to continue the next line. | Yes | No | Yes | No |
| Punctuation Variations / Amount of different special characters | 1 (Less) | 2 (Medium) | 2 (Medium) | 3 (More) |
| Markdown compatibility (also depends on indentation clarity) | Good, but visual conflicts with headings `# Title` | Good | Medium | Good |
| breaks when interrupted with newlines | Yes | No | ? | No |
| Simplicity (Brainload) | Medium | Simple | Complex | More Complex |
    
### Refactoring note
    
**Observing**: From a refactoring perspective, it might also be interesting to see how many conflicts the different formats would cause.
    
nixpkgs comments:

- `##` ~4k usages (most of them for visual separation, e.g., `###########`)
- `#` ~20k usages
- `/*` ~6k usages
- `/**` 160 usages (most empty ?)

Choosing `/**` or subsets would cause minor conflicts within current nixpkgs. While this is NOT the main reason for the final decision, it MUST be considered.

## Just free text as a content format

While this allows the most freedom, it is usually considered the best option, not creating any restrictions.

> However, nix/rfc72 defines commonMark as the official documentation format.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
However, [RFC72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md) defines commonMark as the official documentation format.
```

This is why we decided to follow this convention.

## Consequences of not implementing this

- By not implementing this feature, Nix gains no ability for tool-generated documentation.
- Documentation will be defined by nixdoc, not by the nix community.
- Many existing comments written for documentation will remain imperceptible.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- Will `nix` itself implement native support like in rust -> `cargo doc`?

- How can a tool keep the connection from where a docstring was defined and where the attribute was exposed (lib/default. Nix exposes mapAttrs which is defined at lib/attrsets. Nix)

>   - There are more complicated things.

Reviewer 7: Name them or maybe remove this? :D

For the beginning it seems promising to start with the static approach (1). In the long term dynamic approach (2) seems more promising and accurate but requires a much deeper understanding of compilers and evaluators.
However the border between those two variants is not strict and the community might even build tools that live in between.  

## Type

- An RFC under construction specifies the used Syntax within the `# Type` Heading.
- The `type` feature should belong in the nix syntax. Try them within the comments first; This is still possible.

- see a [preview](https://typednix.dev) of an eventual future doc-type-syntax.

## Native support in Nix

- `NixOS/nix` could implement native support for doc-comments so that our users do not have to rely on nixpkgs or external tools. Those tools can still exist and provide more custom functionality, but documenting nix expressions should be natively possible.

## References

### Other Conventions

- [Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/comments.html#doc-comments)
- [Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/)

> - [JSDoc](https://jsdoc.app/)

Reviewer 7: I would also add https://go.dev/doc/comment, which is an example of an ecosystem not introducing a new comment format.

Extending the scope of *nixdoc* is not the primary goal. Instead, we should find formal rules for writing *doc-comments*. Tools like *nixdoc* can then implement against this RFC instead of the format relying on nixdoc implementation details.

### Impossible to differentiate from regular comments

The format does not allow any distinction between doc comments and regular comments.

Having a distinction would allow us to

1. Find all comments that are part of the documentation
2. Render them in the documentation format
3. Connect the documentation to the exact places in the Nix code. 

### References to the problems above

#### nixpkgs - Dosctrings examples

- [lib/attrsets](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/attrsets.nix)
- [trivial-builders](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/trivial-builders.nix)
- [stdenv/mkDerivation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix)
- [nixos/lib/make-disk-image](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix)

> - more

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

These are examples, so it's implied that there are more.

#### frameworks

> - [dream2nix/utils](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/utils/config.nix)

Reviewer 7: What is this example trying to say? Lack of types signatures?

Author: This should showcase that nix-frameworks would also profit from a formalized doc-comment. 

In that example, they use single-line comments to write multiline documentation. 

That specific collection of links should show the inconsistency within the Nix ecosystem, which is a goal of this RFC.

Reviewer 7: OK, so maybe mention this in the RFC itself? Otherwise it's not clear without reading these comments, IMO.

> - [dream2nix/templates/builder](https://github.com/nix-community/dream2nix/blob/main/src/templates/builders/default.nix)

Reviewer 7: Here as well, you could explain why you've added this to the list.

Author: I think I'll remove this section. Wanted to show that frameworks suffer from missing doc-comments. But I think I don't need to link those.

> - more

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

- Inner format rules that describe the required format of a doc-comment.

However, both concerns relate closely to each other; It makes sense and reduces bureaucracy to address both in a single RFC.

> 

Reviewer 8: empty change, is this intended?

Adopting CommonMark as the content for all doc-comments brings the benefits of widely accepted and understood documentation format in tech projects, while maintaining profitability and consistency within the Nix ecosystem by aligning with existing [NixOS/RFC-72](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/blob/master/rfcs/0072-commonmark-docs.md).

> The content indentation inherits the indentation logic from nixs' multiline strings `'' ''` allowing any arbitrary indentation the user might prefer.

Reviewer 8: If the comment is formatted as Markdown, I think it is unnecessary to say we have the same "indentation" rules as Nix language. Because markdown itself strips indentation when displaying. 

For implementation concern, it's relatively difficult to maintain the same indentation rules (very complicated & constructed for the parser). I suggest to keep comments as-is when we lexed them, and just use any markdown render to display.

## `/** */` is the doc-comment format

The decision to use /** to start a doc-comment ensures a unique distinction from regular comments while still allowing seamless writing without IDE or editor support. This choice not only provides the best developer experience but also minimizes the need for additional tooling overhead.

## Placement

> - Documentable nodes are `lambda value` and `attribute name` only. (This might be extended in the future)

Reviewer 8: > Documentable nodes

Are you speaking for AST nodes? Actually C++ nix does not treat `attribute name` a node (and cannot evaluates to any value), it is just a symbol inside an attribute. So I think this might be unclear.

> Documentable nodes are `lambda value`

What's the documentation subject? the expression or the value that expression corresponds (evaluates) to? I read some examples below and looks like we are documenting expressions, not values. 

```nix
{
    a = foo 1;
#   ^
#   |   ^~~~~   ---- this is a ExprCall with 1 as the argument, and it is the body of AttrName.
#   +------we know the symbol is `a`, this is unique for each evaluation (repl), that is, it has a unique identifier among evaluation

}
```

Author: In the PoC that i maintain
Lambdas are documented at the value level. 
Attribute names in the expr level but i'm unsure how much we should specify that.
Can an attribute name be specified on the value level?

Author: > We are specifying the relationship between doc-comments and the **expression** they are documenting.

Everything that goes deeper is an implementation detail.

- Doc-comments are placed before the documentable node. Only `WHITESPACES` are allowed in between.

>     - `WHITESPACES` are: `[\n \r ' ' \t]`, singleline- and multiline-comments (that are not doc-comments). 

Reviewer 8: > singleline- and multiline-comments

I guess it will be more difficult to support allowing singleline & multiline comments between doc-comments and AST nodes, and it is not very intuitive, just allowing `[\n \r ' ' \t]` makes the code more readable (we don't need to maintain complex regexes for dealing with comments again).

Accurate and usable Lambda documentation reqires some more details to be specified:

> - **If a lambda is assigned to an `attribute name`, then the `attribute name`-documentation is also the `lambda value` documentation**.

Reviewer 8: I'd like to suggest not using the word `assign`, because there is actually no "assignment" happens in the parser, it is something similar to a json field, not an assignment. For C++ nix there is no this term actually, we just treat this token as a part of an attribute, which is a part of `binds` (NTerm).

``` 

### Examples when the lambda is not directly assigned

```nix
{
    /**This documents (1), NOT (2) */
    ↓1    ↓2
    foo = map (x: x);
          ^~~~~~~~~~~ Evaluates to a specialisation of map, which is a partially applied lambda and defined elsewhere.
          
# IMPORTANT: Documentation of the specialized map function can still be done as shown. But is related to attrName 'foo' (1)
}
```

```nix
{
    /**This documents (1), NOT (2) */
    ↓1                           ↓2
    foo = mapAttrs (name: value: (x: x) ) {a=1; b=2;};
    # => 
    # foo = {
    #   a = x: x;
    #   b = x: x; 
    # }
# Doesn't document the inner anonymous lambda function.
}
```

### Partially applied lambda

All partial functions can share the same placement with the outermost lambda.

```nix
/**Generic doc for all partial lambda functions too*/
↓1 ↓2          ↓3
x: ({y, ...}:  z: x + y) * z;

# 1 -> Lambda Value `x: ({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z` countApplied: 0
# 2 -> Lambda Value `({y, ...}: z: x + y) * z`    countApplied: 1
# 3 -> Lambda Value `z: x + y) * z`               countApplied: 2
```

```nix
{
    /** incrMap. Adds one to every item. */
    ↓    

>     incrMap = map (x: x + 1);

Reviewer 8: `map` is a primop isn't it? why it is defined elsewhere? I understand what you mean here, but I think we should pick up a curried lambda for this example, `map` might be confusing for readers.

              ^~~~~~~~~~~ Evaluates to a specialisation of map, which is a partially applied lambda and defined elsewhere.
              
# The lambda documementation is taken from the place where the `map` lambda is defined
# Retrieve the documentation from the attribute 'incrMap'.
}
```

Still all other 'Fundamentals' apply.

```nix
                                 Always doc for anonymous lambda function 'y: x + y'
                                 ↓    

> x: /** Partial Doc for y: x+y */ y: x + y;

Reviewer 8: Is there any example showing how to access the anonymous lambda and get it's doc? I think it is somehow unnecessary to document anonymous lambdas actually.

Author: Yes. There are some examples in nixpkgs and i think it is important to support documentation in the same file, where the implementation is. 
e.g.
https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/lib/make-disk-image.nix

<summary>Arguments</summary>

- (+) Stays primarily compatible with the currently used comments in lib.
    - (-) Outside the ./lib folder, nixodc is not a convention.
- (-) Is not widely understood.
- (-) The format is specific, should be more generic, and follow established conventions. (e.g., Markdown, Doxygen, JSdoc, Haddock)
- (-) The format is too complex and needs a whole list of complex rules to describe the exact format and content rules; this can also be observed in many false-formatted comments that do not render correctly.
    - (-) The sections are implicitly continued.
    - (-) The predefined section headers/keywords are very close to natural language and may accidentally be used.
        - (-) Syntax to start new sections does not follow conventions (e.g., `Example:`) In contrast JSdoc defines `@Example`; Markdown `# Example`; Doxygen `@example`; Haskell-Haddock `>>>`
    - (-) The content is implicitly rendered differently depending on predefined rules. Those rules need to be understood/feel natural.

> - (+) Is already quite established in /lib.

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
```

What is the difference between first and this bullet points? Or what different aspects they try to capture?

```markdown
- (+) Stays primarily compatible with the currently used comments in lib.
```
```markdown
- (+) Is already quite established in /lib.
```

# Dynamic attribute
```

#### `Let .. in ..` binding

```nix
let
 /** Documentation for the id function*/
     ↓
 a = x: x;
in
 a

# Documentation can still be retrieved.
```

#### Partial lambda functions

```nix
/**Generic doc for all partial lambda functions*/
↓1 ↓2          ↓3
x: ({y, ...}:  z: x + y * z)

# All partial functions can share the same placement with the outermost lambda.
# 1 -> Lambda Value `x: ({y, ...}: z: x + y * z)` 
# 2 -> Lambda Value `({y, ...}: z: x + y * z)`    
# 3 -> Lambda Value `z: x + y * z)`               
```

> Allows for fallback documentation in case documentation on the partially applied function cannot be written or retrieved.

#### Lambda formals

```nix
/**Doc for the whole lambda function*/
{

>  /**Doc for attribute 'a'*/

Reviewer 8: same

 a
}:
 a              
```

```nix
/**Doc for the whole lambda function*/
{

>  /**Doc for attribute 'a'*/

Reviewer 8: formal 'a' ?

 a,
 ...
}@args:
 a + args.b;

> # `...` and `@args` cannot (yet) be documented.

Reviewer 8: why cannot this be documented?

Author: How could this be documented? Do you think implementation and **retrieval** works? If yes then we'll change it. Currently i dont know how this could work.

Reviewer 8: Don't know how implementation retrieval works, I just think it is unnecessary to explicitly *forbid* this. The sentence is describing implementation detail (we cannot retrieve this comment).

Maybe we can write something like kwargs documentation here (e.g. python docs).

Author: Maybe remove this particular example? We have yet to have any POCs proving or showing the implications.

> # We recommend:

Reviewer 8: this looks like a nix-lang style, not the placement of doc-comments?
